Controlling for performance capacity confounds in neuroimaging studies of conscious awareness

Jorge Morales, Jeffrey Chiang, Hakwan Lau — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC5932880, CC BY 4.0.

Studying the neural correlates of conscious awareness depends on a reliable comparison between activations associated with awareness and unawareness. One particularly difficult confound to remove is task performance capacity, i.e. the difference in performance between the conditions of interest. While ideally task performance capacity should be matched across different conditions, this is difficult to achieve experimentally. However, differences in performance could theoretically be corrected for mathematically. One such proposal is found in a recent paper by Lamy, Salti and Bar-Haim [Lamy D, Salti M, Bar-Haim Y. Neural correlates of subjective awareness and unconscious processing: an ERP study. J Cognitive Neurosci 2009,21:1435-46], who put forward a corrective method for an electroencephalography experiment. We argue that their analysis is essentially grounded in a version of High Threshold Theory, which has been shown to be inferior in general to Signal Detection Theory. We show through a series of computer simulations that their correction method only partially removes the influence of performance capacity, which can yield misleading results. We present a mathematical correction method based on Signal Detection Theory that is theoretically capable of removing performance capacity confounds. We discuss the limitations of mathematically correcting for performance capacity confounds in imaging studies and its impact for theories about consciousness.

Keywords: neural correlates of consciousness (NCC), signal detection theory (SDT), high threshold theory, EEG, unconscious perception


Performance confound in studies of consciousness

In the search of neural correlates of consciousness (NCC), subjects’ response to the presentation of a visual stimulus can be assessed by subjective or objective measures (Snodgrass and Shevrin, 2006; Seth et al., 2008; Sandberg et al., 2010; Irvine, 2013). Researchers who use subjective reports as measures of the state of awareness of subjects recognize the importance of controlling for confounding factors (Merikle et al., 2001; Bachmann, 2009; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Sergent et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014; Bachmann, 2015). Ideally, when comparing a condition where subjects report consciously seeing a target against a control condition where subjects report not consciously seeing it, the difference between these two conditions should be conscious awareness only.

When looking for objective measures of conscious awareness, it is common that some researchers treat performance at chance level as a reliable indicator of unconscious processing (Eriksen, 1960; Dehaene et al., 1998; Kouider and Dehaene, 2007). The inability to distinguish a stimulus from noise or from another stimulus, however, should not be immediately equated with lack of awareness. Performance, at any level, should rather be treated as a potential confound in consciousness research (Weiskrantz et al., 1995; Lau and Passingham, 2006; Lau, 2008; Bachmann, 2009; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Aru et al., 2012a; 2012b; Li et al., 2014; Pitts et al., 2014; Bachmann, 2015). In contrast, subjective reports are indeed a valid measure of conscious awareness. As such, we should isolate the influence of task performance capacity in any comparison between different levels of subjective reports of awareness. However, even among those persuaded by this logic, few actually conduct experiments to isolate performance capacity confounds. The main reason is, probably, that it is difficult to achieve it experimentally. Usually, when subjective reports of awareness differ, performance capacity also differs. This is true in most detection and discrimination tasks, as well as in paradigms like binocular rivalry, in which detecting changes in the suppressed image is harder (Wales and Fox, 1970).

Nevertheless, some attempts to control for performance capacity have been recently made in conscious awareness imaging studies. For example, Lau and Passingham (2006) conducted a study using metacontrast masking. By varying the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOAs) between stimulus presentation and mask presentation, they found two SOAs where performance capacity in a discrimination task was matched for each subject, and yet subjective reports of awareness differed. They reported specific hemodynamic activation in the prefrontal cortex in association with trials in the condition that generated the higher percentage of “aware” ratings. This study can be taken as a proof of concept that performance capacity confounds can be eliminated. However, the number of trials where subjects claimed consciously seeing the target differed only by about 10% between the two conditions. Admittedly, a problem with this approach is that it relies on a specific kind of stimulus: metacontrast masked shapes. For researchers interested in other perceptual paradigms, it is hard to see how this method of performance capacity matching could generalize.

Another study (Persaud et al., 2011) matched performance between the normal sighted side of the visual field and the subjective blind side of the visual field in a hemianoptic patient, by presenting stimuli with low contrast to the patient’s normal visual field and high contrast to the damaged visual field to compensate for the defects in processing sensitivity. But this opportunity is specific to the availability of a single rare patient.

While these studies effectively eliminated the performance confound as such, other problems intimately interlinked when controlling for performance can still arise. For instance, when performance is matched by varying the stimulation conditions, as in Persaud et al. (2011), pre- and post-perceptual processing can obscure the interpretation of awareness-related activations (Bachmann, 2009). Another potential issue is that subjective reports can differ due to variations in how subjects are probed and not due to differences in performance or conscious awareness itself. Different scales (Sandberg et al., 2010) or different criterion contents (i.e. different aspects of the experience subjects use for report) (Bachmann and Francis, 2014; Bachmann, 2015) can hinder contrastive analyses in imaging studies. Finally, another potential problem is that markers of specific conscious contents corresponding to the target stimulus have to be distinguished both conceptually and experimentally from the markers of conscious processes nonspecific to the target. When attempting to eliminate performance confounds, this distinction is relevant because nonspecific conscious processes can be shared by both correct and incorrect trials (Bachmann, 2015). Unfortunately, it would be complicated to control experimentally for all these potential confounds at once.

In an attempt to overcome these difficulties, Lamy et al. (2009) proposed a general method to control for the influence of performance capacity by comparing between subjectively conscious and unconscious conditions during an electroencephalography (EEG) experiment. Instead of trying to match performance experimentally, they proposed to correct for its influence mathematically, keeping stimuli at threshold constant across aware and unaware trials. In this article, we focus on this potentially promising method. We first expand on the logic of their methodology, trying to provide an intuitive explanation for the motivation behind it. Then, we show that the method and its assumptions are problematic from the perspective of Signal Detection Theory (SDT) and offer an alternative based on it.

Although we focus on Lamy and colleagues’ proposal, it is important to note that we do so because it is a useful case study that has general conceptual and empirical ramifications concerning an appropriate analysis of perceptual signal, performance capacity confound, and the neural correlates of consciousness. Thus, the concerns we raise regarding Lamy and colleagues’ correction method can be generalized to other neuroimaging studies and techniques, as well as to philosophical debates on consciousness and its relation to performance in general and to attention in particular (Block, 2007; Lau and Rosenthal, 2011; Prinz, 2012; Montemayor and Haladjian, 2015). Furthermore, other laboratories have already used their suggested method (Hesselmann et al., 2011) and leading consciousness researchers like Stanislas Dehaene have recently praised them for having accomplished the “remarkable feat” of keeping both performance and stimuli the same and, thanks to “a perfect control,” having “confirmed [a neural] signature of conscious access” (2014, pp. 129–30). However, despite all the merits behind it, their correction method makes what we think are unsound assumptions about perception and consciousness. Hence, its limitations have to be considered when designing and analyzing imagining studies on the neural correlates of consciousness.


Mathematical correction for performance confound: unconscious lucky answers

Lamy, Salti and Bar-Haim (2009) (LSB, henceforth) conducted an event-related potentials (ERPs) study on the neural correlates of conscious and unconscious visual processing where stimuli were constant across aware and unaware conditions. Subjects were presented with a 15 × 15 matrix of tilted lines (15°), some of which were slightly more tilted (25°) forming a 3 × 3 target square in one of four possible quadrants. A 15 × 15 matrix with tilted lines (25°) masked the targets after a short (∼25 to 100 ms, individually adjusted to achieve 25% conscious detection) or a long (∼37 to 112 ms, individually adjusted to achieve 50% conscious detection) exposure. Subjects made two judgments. First, a 4-alternative forced choice (4-AFC) regarding the quadrant where the target 3 × 3 square was presented. Then, a subjective judgment whether they were aware of the target or whether they were just guessing. Continuous EEG was recorded from 20 scalp regions during all trials and subjects’ responses were coded in the four following categories: subjects reported seeing the stimulus and correctly indicated its location (aware-correct), subjects reported seeing the stimulus and incorrectly indicated its location (aware-incorrect), subjects did not report seeing the stimulus and correctly indicated its location (unaware-correct), and subjects did not report seeing the stimulus and incorrectly indicated its location (unaware-incorrect). Note that in the last two categories subjects reported they were just guessing.

Confirming previous similar results (Sergent et al., 2005; Del Cul et al., 2007; Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010; Batterink et al., 2012), LSB reported a scalp-wide difference in the P3 waveform component (a positive voltage in the 300–650 latency range) in subjects’ ERPs between the aware-correct and unaware-correct conditions. They took this difference to reflect conscious processing. Critically, the comparison was focused on correct trials only (aware-correct vs. unaware-correct), as a direct comparison between all the aware and all the unaware trials would have involved a performance capacity confound. That is, awareness would have been confounded with overall performance since awareness co-occurred with higher performance rates. By comparing correct trials only, LSB matched performance in the sense that both conditions involve perfect accuracy, enabling thus a legitimate comparison between awareness and unawareness.

However, to really match performance between the conditions, LSB correctly realized the need to distinguish between two possible scenarios for trials in which subjects answered correctly and did not report seeing the target (the unaware-correct condition). It is possible that subjects unconsciously processed the visual stimulus, and therefore answered correctly. Alternatively, subjects could also have failed to process the stimulus, i.e. neither consciously nor unconsciously, and yet arrived at the correct answer by chance—in a 4-AFC task, random responding leads to an expected 25% chance of being correct. It is important to eliminate the influence of these correct-by-chance trials, because in comparing aware-correct and unaware-correct, the hope is not just to match performance as measured by sheer accuracy (in this case accuracy was 100% in both conditions). Rather, one would hope to match the underlying performance capacity. Only by removing the influence of the correct-by-chance trials in the unaware-correct condition one would be able to compare two conditions where the underlying performance capacities are matched (both at ceiling).

Thus, LSB developed a mathematical method to correct for the influence of those correct-by-chance trials (see and LSB’s endnote 2). Their underlying idea is that by looking at the overall accuracy in unaware trials, one can estimate what percentage of trials in the unaware-correct category is correct by chance. In a 4-AFC task we would expect 25% of unaware trials to be correct simply due to chance.

In order to correct for this percentage of unaware-correct-by-chance trials, LSB further assumed that the ERPs for these trials should just look like the ERPs for unaware-incorrect trials. The intuition behind their logic is that both types of trial have in common that subjects’ brains failed to process the target. The only difference is that subjects were lucky in the correct-by-chance trials. With this assumption in mind, they attempted to subtract away the influence of the correct-by-chance trials on the set of unaware-correct trials. In summary, they assumed that the observed ERPs for overall unaware-correct is a weighted sum of the ERPs of the truly correct trials (processed-unaware-correct trials) and the ERPs of the correct-by-chance trials (unprocessed-unaware-correct trials). Thus, their correction method would get at the underlying ERPs for the processed-unaware-correct trials, which they call unaware-correct chance-free trials (see and LSB’s endnote 2 for details).

After this correction, LSB still found significant differences in the P3 components of ERPs between the aware-correct and the unaware-correct chance-free conditions. Because now both conditions were supposed to include only truly correct trials where subjects processed the targets effectively, they argue that performance capacity was truly matched. Their logic is that their results now really reflect the signature of conscious processing, uncorrupted by confounds of performance capacity.


Problematic assumptions of mathematical correction for correct trials by chance

LSB analysis implicitly incorporates some of the major assumptions behind what is often called in psychophysics a High Threshold Model (HTM) (Swets, 1961; Luce, 1963; Green and Swets, 1966; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). In this section, we discuss a general HTM in the context of detection and discrimination, and its discrepancies with the more popular methods of SDT.


High threshold models

A key conceptual component of HTM is that there is a discrete boundary that separates two distinct conditions: effective processing, in which a target is being processed correctly, and ineffective processing, in which a target is not being processed at all. According to HTM, mere background noise can never lead to true detection, which means that correct responses during unprocessed trials arise only from guessing.

LSB seem to have in mind precisely this kind of model when discussing their experimental paradigm: “Because localization performance was clearly above chance, stimulus conditions were such that observers unconsciously perceived [i.e. processed] the target on average. Yet, on those individual trials in which the observers produced an incorrect response, it is reasonable to claim that they did not perceive [i.e. processed] the target. Such trials were therefore defined as ‘no-perception’ trials” (2009, p. 1442; emphasis added). Incorrect responses are a direct consequence, according to LSB, of a lack of processing of the target (bottom stream in) and, hence, of true guessing. LSB accept that perceptual processing is not sufficient for conscious awareness and, hence, that there can be processed unconscious targets (bottom half of top stream in). These trials are the ones that give rise to a subjective feeling of guessing. Note that in their framework the unaware processed trials are always correct (because incorrect trials are no-perception trials). Put simply, for LSB only targets (i.e. never pure noise) can cross the processing threshold. Conversely, if a target is not reported accurately it can be inferred that it was not perceptually processed. The distinction between processed and unprocessed stimuli is, then, sharp and clear.

Following this model, the only possible source of ambiguity is those unprocessed (and hence unaware) responses that are correct due to chance (upward arrow in bottom stream on). LSB suggest comparing unaware-correct chance-free and aware-correct trials to find the true neural correlates of consciousness. We conclude that the sharp distinctions between unaware-correct by chance, unaware-correct chance-free, and aware-correct trials that their proposal requires make sense only if something like HTM is assumed.


SDT

Despite its prima facie intuitiveness, decades of psychophysics research have favored SDT over HTMs (Luce, 1963; Klein, 2001; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). Rather than having binary “processed” and “unprocessed” internal states, according to SDT the presentation of a target gives rise in the subject to an internal perceptual response that lies on a continuum. The strength of the internal response is hardly ever exactly at zero due to the presence of noise. In other words, a stimulus is hardly ever in an unprocessed state. The signal of a target is always corrupted by noise, and therefore, performance capacity is determined by the signal-to-noise ratio of the internal response. There is no magical point below which subjects always completely fail to process the target and above which they always process it successfully.

According to SDT (Macmillan and Creelman, 2005), the presentation of a stimulus A or B in a discrimination task gives rise to an internal response in the subject. The internal perceptual response varies from trial to trial, falling into one of two Gaussian distributions with equal variance and different means, depending on the stimulus presented and the subject’s internal state (i.e. noise). Subjects set a criterion against which they compare the internal response, which leads to the classification of the signal as being due to the presentation of stimulus A or B. The placement of the internal decision criterion can be determined by perceptual biases or by subjects’ response biases (Witt et al., 2015). These can be influenced by preference, a strategy for maximizing the proportion of correct answers or expected value, subjective appearance (veridical or not) of the target, or attentional resources (Macmillan and Creelman, 2005; Rahnev et al., 2011; Morales et al., 2015). Because the distributions for the internal responses overlap, it is possible (and quite common) that stimulus A is mistaken for stimulus B, or vice versa. Additionally, trials are reported as aware when the internal perceptual response is strong enough to cross one of the outermost awareness criteria, and they are reported as unaware otherwise. Note that this allows for aware-incorrect trials when the internal response is drawn from the wrong distribution and yet it is strong enough to cross an awareness criterion (e.g. the right tail of the stimulus A distribution beyond the awareness criterion in).

Insofar as SDT rejects this strict dichotomy between perfectly processed and unprocessed stimuli, it is incompatible with HTM. But why prefer one model over the other?


The argument from incorrect conscious trials

A specific problem of HTM regarding consciousness studies is that it cannot explain the presence of incorrect trials when subjects report being aware of a target. According to the model as conceived by LSB, if subjects are aware of a target, it has to be because it was successfully processed. Thus, the presence of aware-incorrect trials is a problem. LSB report a small, but not negligible, percentage of this kind of trials: 11% and 3.9% for short and long exposures, respectively. It is common practice in psychophysics to take into consideration lapse trials, i.e. trials where subjects did not witness the signal at all—sneezes or blinks are often blamed—or trials where nonperceptual problems, like motoric clumsiness, are accountable for the mistake. Lapse trials, however, are estimated at rates that go from 0% to 1% in the most lenient cases (Klein, 2001), which leaves LSB’s empirical results unexplained.

However, aware-incorrect trials are not uncommon and they can be seen in many other studies (Hesselmann et al., 2011), and in some cases in high proportions (Lau and Passingham, 2006). Hence, the presence of aware-incorrect trials in LSB’s experiment is in conflict with the core assumptions behind their version of an HTM. In contrast, as can be noted in, aware-incorrect trials are an expected consequence of the SDT assumptions of our proposal. These trials are classified as aware and hence, despite being incorrect, should be accounted for when looking for the NCC.


Empirical inadequacy of HTM receiving operating characteristic curves

What really convinced generations of psychophysicists that SDT is a superior model to HTM is the comparison of theoretical and empirical ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curves. An ROC curve is a plot of hit rate against false alarm rate. In a discrimination task (but the principle generalizes to yes/no, detection, and forced-choice tasks as well), a subject’s hit and false alarm rates produce one point on an ROC plot. By changing the subject’s criterion in different conditions to be more liberal (more hits and more false alarms) and then more conservative (less hits and less false alarms), multiple points on the ROC space can be plotted. According to SDT, when sensitivity is different form zero, an ROC curve should be curvilinear (a), whereas according to HTM the ROC should be a straight line (b). Most empirical ROC curves from human subjects in visual experiments typically look like the one predicted by the SDT model, and hardly ever look like the one predicted by HTM. This is a strong reason to prefer SDT models over HTM with respect to human visual perception (Krantz, 1969; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005), auditory perception (Green and Swets, 1966), and memory (Wixted, 2009; Dube and Rotello, 2012).

We should note that in the memory literature, HTMs have enjoyed more popularity than in different perceptual modalities. In particular, mixed models (Aly and Yonelinas, 2012; Yonelinas and Jacoby, 2012), where recognition responses follow HTM and familiarity responses conform to SDT, have been well received, but they have also been criticized from the perspective of SDT (Wixted and Mickes, 2010). Here we are agnostic to this specific issue. We are not arguing that all HTMs are necessarily wrong. What we maintain here is that in the case of vision psychophysics, it is uncontroversial that SDT is much better supported by empirical data than HTM and that HTMs are inappropriate for conscious awareness studies. Their inadequacy lies on how they depict the internal representation of signal and noise, heavily underestimating the role of the latter. Analysis methods for vision that assume HTM rather than SDT are, thus, problematic. But how problematic is LSB’s HTM for conscious vision? How exactly might it have biased their results?


A computer simulation to demonstrate the inadequacy of LSB’s correction method

We performed a computational simulation analysis to evaluate the degree of inadequacy of the correction method proposed by LSB. The idea behind it was to determine, assuming SDT is the correct model of perceptual processing (as the empirical evidence robustly suggests), how results of an idealized ERP experiment would look like using LSB’s correction method. As any other theoretical model of perception, SDT has explanatory limits. It is only within these limits that we attempt to assess the effectiveness of LSB’s correction method.

For simplicity, we assumed that subjects performed a two-choice discrimination task, which is analytically more tractable than a 4-AFC task and its results are trivially generalizable. The simulation consisted on distinguishing between two stimulus alternatives (A and B), and then reporting whether there was awareness of the target or not. It followed the SDT assumptions presented in section 3.2. The presentation of a stimulus along with noise is assumed to give rise to an internal perceptual response that varies from trial to trial and that falls into one of two Gaussian distributions depending on which stimulus was presented. Discrimination is made by comparing the internal response to a criterion. The trial is reported as aware if the strength of the internal response crosses one of the awareness criteria. For every trial, we made the strength of the internal perceptual response correlate with a hypothetical neural response and a corresponding ERP of an arbitrary electrode site. We modeled this ERP as a sinusoidal response over time, scaling the amplitude of the ERP response by the strength of the internal perceptual response sampled from either of the Gaussian distributions (see for technical details).

For computational simplicity, we modeled perceptual processing as the ERP response from 0 ms to 333 ms. When the internal response was strong enough to cross the awareness criteria, the model assumes a constant brain signal is added to it, which may reflect a putative processing signature of awareness. For aware trials, then, we added an extra half cycle to the sinusoidal response so that there is a third “bump” in the ERP waveform (333–500 ms) (a). This extra cycle represents the differentiating processing uniquely associated with conscious awareness that is absent in trials without awareness (b and c). The idea is that by subtracting the unaware mean waveform from the aware mean waveform, if the unaware mean waveform is appropriately corrected for, we should be left just with activity properly related to awareness (i.e. the “third” bump). Despite its idealized nature, these simulations can help us determine the expected effectiveness of a performance correction method.

We note that neural responses associated with awareness need not arise late (>333 ms) and they need not be temporally dissociated from the purely classification processes. Finding the precise timing and localization of these signatures is the goal of imagining studies looking for the NCC. Hence, the simulations assumed the dissociated late timing for mere illustration purposes. The extra cycle associated with consciousness, then, could have been added earlier too (e.g. at ∼100 ms), as has been reported by different laboratories (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2003; Pins and ffytche, 2003; Aru and Bachmann, 2009; Railo et al., 2011; Andersen et al., 2015; Rutiku et al., 2015). Along with other simplifications (e.g. the use of a sinusoidal waveform or the fact that wavelength, symmetry and latency are constant with changes in internal response), these assumptions should not affect the main lesson to be drawn from this exercise. Its main purpose is to illustrate how a correction method that assumes HTM performs under reasonable SDT assumptions. To emphasize, we suggest this simple-minded model for ease of visualization and implementation only.

The results presented in and were obtained after a 10,000-trial computer simulation (see for technical details; the Matlab code used for generating all the simulations is provided as part of the). shows the ERP average responses under the different relevant conditions. In, we implemented the correction as described by Lamy et al. (specifically, endnote 2). The unaware-correct response (b, and repeated for ease of comparison in a as the solid curve) is only marginally different from the unaware-correct chance-free response (a, dashed curve). This is the waveform obtained after applying the correction suggested by LSB’s method to eliminate performance confounds by lucky guesses. Hence, the influence of subtracting unaware correct-by-chance trials from aware-correct activations is only marginal. Both subtractive comparisons, namely, aware-correct minus unaware-correct (b, solid curve) and aware-correct minus unaware-correct chance-free (b, dashed curve), turn out to be almost the same, suggesting that the corrected unaware trials made a small contribution, if any, for singling out the signal specific to awareness. Concretely, in the latter comparison (b, dashed curve) there is still a clear residual activation during the first sinusoidal period of the ERP (0–333 ms), associated with the internal perceptual response strength in general, and not specifically to awareness, which occurs late in our simulations, i.e. from 333 ms to 500 ms (a). An optimal analysis where only the awareness signature response remains after a subtractive comparison should cancel out the early response, leaving just the late response that is specific to awareness. As it is clear from b, LSB’s method fails to single out the specific response associated with awareness when plausible SDT assumptions are in place, defeating the purpose for which it was originally devised.

It is here that we can see the crucial, but flawed, role that LSB’s High Threshold assumption plays. They assume that the ERP response of unaware-correct-by-chance trials looks the same as the ERP response of unaware-incorrect trials (c): both are taken to be trials with unprocessed targets. Problematically, unaware-incorrect and unaware-correct do not look that different in the first place—the former’s amplitude is only about half smaller than the latter’s—so the unaware-incorrect waveform cannot have a very big influence on unaware-correct anyway. This is also observed in the actual ERP reported in LSB’s 2009 paper (their Fig. 3). It is of crucial importance to note that their results stayed basically the same regardless of whether they used unaware-correct or unaware-correct chance-free trials. In other words, their correction method affected in a negligible way their analyses, even though it was designed precisely to compensate for a significant underperformance during unawareness. This should be surprising for LSB since their assumed HTM implies that processed and unprocessed trials are radically different. Furthermore, in the P3 component during long-exposure trials (their Fig. 2) there is no difference between the amplitude of unaware-correct and unaware-incorrect trials. This is an important unpredicted fact in their theory that receives no comment. [We note that the difference between unaware-correct and unaware-incorrect was found to be significant in the P3 component in the parietal region in a follow up study (Salti et al., 2012)].

On SDT, however, this type of outcome is to be expected because both unaware-correct and unaware-incorrect are trials that come from the inner partitions between the awareness criteria, where signal strength is weak, and they are not necessarily very different in each of the two partitions. As a matter of fact, unaware-incorrect trials may even have higher internal response strength than unaware-correct trials (due to the overlap of the Gaussian distributions), making them in the end qualitatively similar. Thus, we conclude that LSB’s correction method only partially, and inadequately, removes the performance capacity confound.


An SDT-based correction method

Having demonstrated the inadequacy of LSB’s correction method, we now show a way to perform a theoretically more adequate analysis based on SDT assumptions. The simulation presented in the previous section clearly established what the goal of such a correction should be, namely, to remove the ERP responses associated with mere processing in order to reveal the response that is specific to awareness and independent from performance. Like Lamy and colleagues, we are concerned with awareness as measured by subjective ratings (akin to confidence ratings as characterized within SDT). The distribution properties of the internal signal strength during a discrimination task are known when SDT is assumed, i.e. the internal perceptual response is drawn from one of two overlapping Gaussian distributions with equal variance and different means. Then, an appropriate correction for controlling for performance and factoring in any correct-by-chance trials is actually not difficult to achieve using standard SDT methods.

The primary assumption behind this correction is that activation intensity is linearly determined by the internal response. As it is clear from, an SDT model assumes that unaware trials have a lower mean internal response than aware trials. This fact can be used to correct for performance confounds between aware and unaware trials. The ratio of the mean internal response for aware and unaware trials is used as a scaling factor of the unaware mean waveform. By scaling up the weaker response in the unaware condition to approximately match the intensity of the stronger response in the aware condition, we can subtract away any activation due to magnitude difference in internal response (see for technical details). Put simply, waveforms (but this is potentially generalizable to other types of imaging techniques like BOLD activity) of unaware trials during perceptual processing must be scaled up to match waveform amplitudes (or activation) of aware trials before they are subtracted from them.

The correction from unaware-correct to unaware-correct SDT-adjusted, as we label it to distinguish it from LSB’s chance-free terminology, is presented in a (dashed curve). The subtraction of the scaled up unaware waveform should leave us mainly with the activations relevant to awareness (i.e. the third “bump”) in the simulated ERPs. b shows the result of this process. For comparison, the subtraction aware-correct minus unaware-correct presented in b (solid curves) is repeated in b as well. Unlike LSB’s method, this adjustment method allows a significant difference between subtracting unaware-correct trials and unaware-correct SDT-adjusted trials.

For the sake of completeness, we include in results performing the same analysis with a different selection of parameters: better and worse performance (sensitivity d’) as well as more conservative and more liberal awareness criteria (see caption and for details on the parameters used). Even though there is a slight numerical variation, changing simulated sensitivity or awareness criteria left qualitatively intact the results thus far presented. The chance-free correction suggested by LSB is insufficient to isolate an awareness signature in the simulated ERP activation waveforms, while our SDT-based method is more robust to that end at the same time that it significantly reduces the worries regarding performance confound.


Discussion

In order to discover the neural correlates of the exclusively subjective aspects of conscious awareness, eliminating performance capacity confound is a critical step. Lamy and colleagues’ effort should be commended for recognizing the importance of this issue, and for providing a novel and general method for dealing with this problem in a formal way. We recognize the intuitive appeal of its core logic as well as the importance and the potential impact that methods of its kind may have on the field. Unfortunately, whereas the overall concept behind the analysis is, prima facie, intuitive and appealing, it fails on a technical level due to its problematic assumptions.

The fact that the correction method proposed by LSB only minimally removes the performance capacity confound once plausible signal detection theoretic assumptions are made means that results based on it or on similar approaches have to be reassessed less optimistically. For instance, in their own study, LSB associated awareness with widespread activations. It would not be surprising that some of those activations are due to the failure to thoroughly remove the performance capacity confound. Other laboratories (e.g. Hesselmann et al., 2011) have used LSB’s method trying to control for performance capacity and they found in an fMRI study that BOLD activity in the occipital and temporal areas was associated with awareness. But we know activity in some of these areas reflect internal response strength anyway (as they also predict task performance capacity), so their results may be merely due to the lack of complete removal of the influence of performance capacity. If this were the case, the view that these authors put forward, namely, that awareness may be associated with widely distributed activity in the whole brain, including visual areas, would be undermined. If an awareness signature response were correctly isolated, however, their findings may even turn out to be compatible with the view that awareness is associated with specific activity in a set of brain regions outside of the visual cortex, not directly involved in the generation of the internal perceptual response itself (Lau and Passingham, 2006; Lau and Rosenthal, 2011).

Our simulation results are not presented without misgivings. They are highly idealized and they make strong parametric assumptions regarding neural data. For instance, they assume that the internal perceptual response follows strictly Gaussian distributions and that the strength of the ERP (or whatever other neural response is analyzed, like BOLD activity) follows the exact same distributions. We know that SDT models are appropriate for human perceptual behavior because the underlying parametric assumptions have been validated by psychophysical measurements of ROC curves, which show that the Gaussian distribution assumption is empirically justified in most cases of visual perception. Nevertheless, when it comes to ERP data, relatively little is known about their statistical nature. If awareness modulates neural activity nonlinearly (Friston et al., 1996), both the HTM and SDT corrections presented in this article would fail to reveal the corresponding neural correlates properly.

Another limitation of the present work, shared by LSB’s analyses, is that when contrasting unconscious and conscious activations, the latter could be revealing more than just the neural correlates of consciousness. These could also indicate brain activity present during conscious trials but unrelated to consciousness per se, like post-perceptual processing, working memory, or response preparation (Bachmann, 2009; Aru et al., 2012b; Li et al., 2014; Pitts et al., 2014).

Finally, another limitation is that we assumed only one awareness criterion. This was done mainly for the sake of simplicity and computational tractability and it should not suggest that awareness is an on-off step function. Future work could pursue the effectiveness of this method with multiple criteria, which may more realistically capture the nature of subjective ratings. (Note that with enough criteria, the suggested type of modeling would, in practice, approximate a truly continuous scale.) Relatedly, it may be argued that there are subtle differences between confidence ratings (commonly used in SDT contexts) and awareness judgments (Overgaard and Sandberg, 2012). We acknowledge there are potential differences, but within the framework of SDT these two have been given similar treatments, in that they are both subjective ratings that can be modeled as responses separated by criteria.

With these caveats in mind, we think the conceptual ideas behind our SDT model are useful for the study of consciousness in both behavioral and imaging studies. Because this model is based on the localization of criteria along a decision axis, ratings of awareness can be dissociated from performance capacity, just as response bias can be dissociated from discrimination sensitivity (Ko and Lau, 2012; Maniscalco and Lau, 2012). Furthermore, for a single trial, given the internal response strength, the same stimulus could end up being classified as aware or unaware depending on where the criteria for awareness are placed. This is where HTM and SDT depart from each other more dramatically. Within SDT, for the same stimulus and the same internal response strength, the same subject could classify a trial as aware on one occasion and as unaware in a different occasion, depending on the localization of the subject’s awareness criterion. This boundary is determined by fixating a criterion that changes from subject to subject, from experiment to experiment, and most likely it even jitters from trial to trial.

Perhaps, the most important take-home message of the exercise of focusing on LSB is not methodological in nature. Rather, there is a broader conceptual point that we are hoping to advocate here. When controlling for performance capacity in imaging studies, researchers should focus on controlling for the internal response strength, and not just for adjusting the influence of mere flukes. In imaging studies of consciousness, this means isolating some kind of further processing which only happens during trials crossing the awareness criteria. Such is the logic behind our proposed correction method. Given the complexity of this problem as revealed by the limitations of our correction method described here, we believe that in order to address the issue of performance capacity as a confound, the best method so far is to create task conditions in which task performance is empirically matched, and yet reported subjective levels of awareness differ (Lau and Passingham, 2006; Rounis et al., 2010). Though this may be difficult to achieve experimentally, we hope future research may be able to meet this important challenge.


Editorial

Anil K. Seth, Biyu J. He, Jakob Hohwy — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC5934887, CC BY 4.0.

‘It is remarkable that most of the work in both cognitive science and the neurosciences makes no reference to consciousness (or “awareness”).’ So wrote Francis Crick and Christof Koch, a quarter of a century ago, in a paper which with hindsight marked the rebirth of consciousness science as a serious enterprise (Crick and Koch, 1990). Times have changed and consciousness science has since flourished. It is now a rich multi-disciplinary enterprise engaging neuroscientists, psychologists, philosophers, computer scientists, clinicians and physicists, collaborating in the systematic investigation of the biological and physical mechanisms underlying conscious experience. Consciousness is studied in psychiatric and neurological patients, in non-human animals and in healthy human subjects, with experiments deploying increasingly powerful methodologies for acquiring, analysing and connecting first-person behavioural, neurophysiological and genetic data. The launch of Neuroscience of Consciousness reflects the maturity of this rigorous and empirically grounded approach to the science of subjective experience. As its Editors we share the conviction that natural science has much to say about consciousness, and we look forward to this story unfolding within this new Journal.

People have been wondering about consciousness since they have wondered about anything. Hippocrates long ago identified the brain as the primary organ of experience (though Aristotle did not). Much later, Descartes codified what we now recognize as the ‘hard problem’ of relating matter and consciousness (Chalmers, 1996). At the birth of scientific psychology, midwived by William James and Wilhelm Wundt at the close of the 19th century, consciousness was the central explanatory target (James, 1892). But through the 20th century the influence of behaviourism shifted the goal of psychology to the prediction and control of behaviour, with the study of consciousness pushed to the sidelines. The suppression of consciousness continued even through the rise of cognitive science from the 1960s, albeit with important exceptions here and there. The situation changed dramatically with the rise of functional brain imaging in the 1990s, allowing researchers to examine the living brain while their subjects performed different tasks and had different experiences. At the same time, authorities in biology like Crick and Gerald Edelman (having already won their Nobel prizes) turned their attention explicitly to consciousness (Edelman, 1989; Crick and Koch, 1990), motivated in part by early examples such as the ‘split brain’ studies of Roger Sperry and Mike Gazzaniga (Gazzaniga et al., 1962). Theoretical models like Bernard Baars’ global workspace theory (Baars, 1988), coupled with advances in psychophysical and neurophysiological methods, enabled researchers to look for ‘neural correlates’ of consciousness as a first step towards its naturalization (Crick and Koch, 1990; Metzinger, 2000). Concepts of ‘neuronal synchrony’ provided the first plausible explanations linking the dynamics of brain activity to properties of conscious experience (Gray et al., 1989). In parallel with these developments, there have been increasing efforts to understand the neurobiology of psychopathology in terms of consciousness (Frith, 1979). There has since been a flowering of research aimed directly at understanding the biological basis of consciousness, which has been well covered in several recent reviews (Tononi and Koch, 2008; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; van Gaal and Lamme, 2012; Boly et al., 2013; Brugger and Lenggenhager, 2014).

A challenge facing consciousness science is the lack of a consensual definition for consciousness. This situation is, however, not unusual in science, where definitions, theories and experiments often evolve in parallel rather than in a nice orderly sequence. But perhaps because we all have conscious experiences ourselves, intuitions about what consciousness ‘is’ are commonplace and often strongly held. In one sense these intuitions can be summarized very simply, by saying that for a conscious organism ‘there is something it is like to be that organism’ (Nagel, 1974). Or one can simply indicate that consciousness (for humans) is what disappears when we fall into a dreamless sleep and what returns the next morning when we wake up. For conscious organisms there exists a continuous (though interruptible) stream of conscious scenes or experiences—a phenomenal world—which has the character of being subjective and private.

Beyond these basic statements, opinions differ about how to characterize consciousness as an explanatory target. One increasingly accepted distinction is between conscious ‘level’ (how conscious the organism is) and conscious ‘content’ (being conscious of this rather than that). Another is between consciousness of the ‘world’ and of the ‘self’, which is sometimes related to a distinction between ‘primary’ and ‘higher-order’ consciousness (Edelman, 2003). We do not wish to impose any particular way of thinking here, beyond suggesting that our common sense or folk intuitions about what consciousness ‘is’ should be open to revision, as theories and experiments develop. At the same time, a successful science of consciousness must distinguish between rigorous, testable scientific ideas and those that involve more outlandish speculations (Block et al., 2014). It may be helpful to remember that consciousness science, at least for now, does not need to explain why consciousness exists, to go about unravelling the biological and physical properties that underlie its many properties, in much the same way that physicists have laid bare many mysteries of the universe without accounting for the brute fact that it is there (Seth, 2010).

The main strategy within consciousness science lies in connecting objective (third-person) data about the brain and behaviour, with subjective (first-person) data about the properties of conscious experiences (including whether they are present at all). Within this broad multidisciplinary scope there is an increasing focus on the brain as the primary biological substrate for awareness. Fortunately, the brain is increasingly accessible to consciousness researchers thanks to the rapid development and sophistication of neuroimaging and brain stimulation methods in both humans and animals, and the rich empirical and theoretical literature that already connects properties of cognition and consciousness to the structure and dynamics of the nervous system. At the same time, there is increasing sophistication within methods for obtaining and analysing first-person data (Overgaard and Sandberg, 2012), and relating this data to the brain (Lutz et al., 2002; Seth et al., 2008; Fleming and Dolan, 2012). The time is, therefore, right for a new journal—Neuroscience of Consciousness—to capitalize on the momentum within neuroscience for studying consciousness.

The overall goal of Neuroscience of Consciousness is ‘to support the dissemination of research findings that illuminate the biological basis of consciousness in health and in disease, in humans and in other species’. While the Journal will maintain an emphasis on empirical neuroscience studies, its multidisciplinary foundation encourages submission of behavioural, methodological, theoretical (including modelling) and philosophical papers that exhibit a clear relevance to the biological basis of consciousness. We also emphasize a clinical dimension: the already intolerable and ever increasing burden of neurological and psychiatric illnesses, on individuals and on society, underlines the need for new interventions based on a detailed understanding of how disrupted neural mechanisms engender disordered conscious experiences.

A great variety of more specific topics fall within this general remit. Beyond the fundamental challenge of illuminating the neurobiological basis of consciousness itself, these include interactions between conscious and unconscious processes; selfhood, embodiment, and interoceptive awareness; metacognition and higher-order consciousness; emotional awareness; intention, volition, agency and awareness of actions; individual differences in consciousness; altered states of consciousness; sleep, dreaming and anaesthesia; relations between consciousness, attention and memory; social influences on consciousness; disorders of consciousness; and consciousness in infants and non-human animals. This is by no means an exhaustive list and is provided here simply for orientation rather than as a strict set of criteria. Befitting the wide range of topics, the Journal welcomes a variety of different article types. While we expect the majority of submissions to be research articles, we will also publish review articles, rapid communications (which benefit from expedited review), opinion pieces and spotlight commentaries.

We are delighted to join the Oxford University Press’ (OUP) family of academic journals. As part of Oxford University, OUP retains a core mission statement to support excellence in research, scholarship and education. Neuroscience of Consciousness is one of OUP’s flagship launches for 2015 and the Press will be supporting the Journal at a variety of conferences and other events this year and in the future. The Journal is also from the beginning fully ‘open access’, meaning that the fruits of consciousness science, as recorded in its pages, will be available to all. We are especially delighted that OUP is waiving all publication charges for at least the first year, to enable the Journal to hit the ground running. We are grateful to the OUP journal staff for seeing us through this far, and we are excited to continue working with them.

We are equally excited about our official partnership with the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness (ASSC). The ASSC has long been the premier academic society promoting research into the nature, function and underlying mechanisms of consciousness. There is a shared commitment between the ASSC and the Journal on rigorous empirically testable approaches, informed by (and informing) work of a more theoretical and philosophical nature. There is also a strong overlap in our target communities, with the ASSC’s membership including researchers in cognitive science, medicine, neuroscience, philosophy and other relevant disciplines in the sciences and humanities (see www.theassc.org for more on the ASSC). It bears emphasizing that the historical balance within the ASSC between neuroscience, psychology and philosophy, is fully embedded in the multidisciplinary scope of Neuroscience of Consciousness, and we thank the ASSC board for their constructive engagement with the Journal.

Being a new journal we are still in the process of assembling an Editorial Board. Our aim is for the board to represent the best expertise in consciousness science internationally, spread across all the participating disciplines, and with as broad an international reach as possible. Already, the three primary editors—and authors of this Editorial—are each resident in a different continent, ensuring a global coverage. We are very grateful to those scholars of consciousness who have already agreed to join. Their names are listed on the Journal website http://nc.oxfordjournals.org/.

These are exciting times in the science of consciousness and 2015 is an auspicious year to embark on this new adventure. One hundred years ago Einstein published his equations of general relativity, sparking a transformation in our understanding of the nature and properties of the universe. Neuroscience is of course much younger than physics, the brain is an object of extraordinary complexity (with complexity science only rigorously developed in applied mathematics for less than a century), and, at first glance, the phenomenon of consciousness seems metaphysically resistive in a way that many targets of scientific analysis are not. Hence, we are still a long way off a breakthrough comparable to that of physics. Nonetheless, the neuroscience of consciousness is flourishing, and stands poised to offer deep and important insights about our ‘inner’ universe. We anticipate that the years and decades ahead will transform our understanding of the neurobiological basis of consciousness, and with it the way we see ourselves in nature. We look forward to part of this story being told within the pages of Neuroscience of Consciousness.


Manipulation of working memory contents selectively impairs metacognitive sensitivity in a concurrent visual discrimination task

Brian Maniscalco, Hakwan Lau — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC5989484, CC BY 4.0.

What are the cognitive mechanisms underlying perceptual metacognition? Prior research indicates that prefrontal cortex (PFC) contributes to metacognitive performance, suggesting that metacognitive judgments are supported by high-level cognitive operations. We explored this hypothesis by investigating metacognitive performance for a visual discrimination task in the context of a concurrent working memory (WM) task. We found that, overall, high WM load caused a nonspecific decrease in visual discrimination performance as well as metacognitive performance. However, active manipulation of WM contents caused a selective decrease in metacognitive performance without impairing visual discrimination performance. These behavioral findings are consistent with previous neuroscience findings that high-level PFC is engaged by and necessary for (i) visual metacognition, and (ii) active manipulation of WM contents, but not mere maintenance. The selective interference of WM manipulation on metacognition suggests that these seemingly disparate cognitive functions in fact recruit common cognitive mechanisms. The common cognitive underpinning of these tasks may consist in (i) higher-order re-representation of lower-level sensory information, and/or (ii) application of decision rules in order to transform representations in PFC into definite cognitive/motor responses.


Introduction

Perceptual metacognition refers to the capacity of human and animal observers to introspectively differentiate perceptual judgments that are likely to be correct from those that are less likely to be correct. What are the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying perceptual metacognition? Several lines of evidence link parts of the prefrontal cortex (PFC),including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (rlPFC) and anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC), to metacognition in the visual domain, as well as in the domain of memory: activations in dlPFC and rlPFC have been found to inversely correlate with reports of confidence in visual and memory tasks (Henson et al., 2000; Fleck et al., 2006; Fleming et al., 2012), and rlPFC activations have been found to correlate with metacognitive sensitivity in visual (Fleming et al., 2012) and memory (Yokoyama et al., 2010) tasks. Similarly, single unit recording activity in macaque aPFC has been shown to increase the following correct decisions in a cuing task, even before task feedback is provided (Tsujimoto et al., 2010). In humans, individual differences in aPFC gray matter volume positively correlate with visual metacognitive sensitivity (Fleming et al., 2010; McCurdy et al., 2013). Direct evidence for the causal role of PFC in visual metacognition is provided by transcranial magnetic stimulation and lesion studies: disruption of bilateral dlPFC via transcranial magnetic stimulation selectively impairs visual metacognition while leaving visual discrimination performance intact (Rounis et al., 2010), and patients with aPFC lesions exhibit selective deficits in visual metacognition, as compared with temporal lobe lesioned patients and healthy controls (Fleming et al., 2014).

dlPFC is also involved in working memory (WM) performance. Multiple lines of evidence implicate dlPFC particularly in the active processing of WM contents, rather than the mere storage of WM contents, which is typically attributed to more posterior brain regions, e.g. parietal and occipital cortex (Petrides, 2000; Miller and Cohen, 2001; Curtis and D'Esposito, 2003). For instance, dlPFC activations during delay periods in WM tasks increase when the task requires WM contents to be manipulated (D'Esposito et al., 1999), and other studies have found that dlPFC does not preferentially activate during delay periods, but rather its activation profile reflects the specific process of response selection performed on the basis of WM contents (Rowe et al., 2000; Rowe and Passingham, 2001;Rowe et al., 2002). Basic short-term memory performance can be spared in patients with bilateral prefrontal damage (Petrides, 1989; Owen et al., 1996), but dlPFC lesions impair performance on tasks that require active monitoring and manipulation of WM contents in humans (Petrides and Milner, 1982) and macaques (Petrides, 1995). dlPFC also becomes more activated in WM tasks in which a cognitive strategy allows WM contents to be “chunked” into higher-level units, even though such chunking strategies effectively reduce the number of “items” in WM (Bor et al., 2003). This finding again suggests that dlPFC is more closely linked to strategic monitoring and manipulation of WM contents than it is to the overall difficulty of the memory task or to the number of items that need to be stored in WM.

Given that PFC is recruited in both visual metacognition and executive processing of WM contents, it is possible that common underlying mechanisms are at play in both kinds of cognitive functions. If so, we might expect that metacognitive performance would be selectively impaired by concurrently manipulating WM contents, especially in light of general processing capacity limits and bottlenecks in PFC (Marois and Ivanoff, 2005). Here we test this hypothesis in a dual-task paradigm. While holding a letter string in memory and alphabetizing it, subjects performed a simple two-alternative forced choice visual task and provided confidence ratings. After the visual task, a probe assessed memory for the alphabetized string. We analyzed metacognitive performance under low and high WM load. Within the high WM load condition, we further distinguished between trials that placed low and high manipulation demand (i.e. strings requiring little or extensive alphabetization). To anticipate, we found that metacognitive performance was selectively impaired under high WM load with high manipulation demand, suggesting that a common mechanism contributes to metacognitive evaluation of perceptual decision making and active manipulation of WM contents.


Materials and methods


Experiment 1


Participants

Twenty-three Columbia University students participated in the experiment. Participants gave informed consent and were paid $10 for ∼1 h of participation. The research was approved by the Columbia University’s Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects.

One participant was omitted from data analysis, due to producing outlying data in the perceptual metacognitive task under high WM load (see “Exclusion of outliers” in Materials and methods and).


Experimental procedure

Subjects were seated in a dimmed room 60 cm away from a computer monitor. Stimuli were generated using Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA) and were shown on an iMac monitor (LCD, 24 inches monitor size, 1920 x 1200 pixel resolution, 60 Hz refresh rate).

On every trial, a WM task was performed concurrently with a visual discrimination task. At the start of the trial, an uppercase letter string in black font was displayed on a gray background for 2000 ms. The letter string could consist of either one letter (Low Load condition) or four letters (High Load condition). The across-trial sequence of one- and four-letter string presentations was randomized, such that each string size occurred with equal frequency. Letters in the four-letter strings were presented in random alphabetical order. Letters were chosen randomly from the following set of letters: (F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S, T). Vowels and letters early and late in the alphabet were omitted to increase memorization and alphabetization difficulty. Subjects were instructed to hold the letter string presented at the start of the trial in memory and to alphabetize it, since memory for the alphabetized string would be probed at the end of the trial. This task design closely follows designs used previously to compare the effects of manipulating, versus passively maintaining, WM contents (D'Esposito et al., 1999; Han and Kim, 2004).

After the letter string was presented, a crosshair (0.35° wide) was presented centrally for 500 ms, and then the stimuli for the visual discrimination task were presented. Two stimuli were presented simultaneously for 33 ms, one 4° to the left of fixation and one 4° to the right. Each stimulus was a circle (3° diameter) consisting of randomly generated visual noise. The target stimulus contained a randomly oriented sinusoidal grating (two cycles per degree) embedded in the visual noise. After stimulus presentation, subjects provided a forced-choice judgment of whether the left or the right stimulus contained a grating. The grating location was determined randomly on each trial, and gratings appeared equally often on the left and right. Following stimulus classification, subjects rated their confidence in the accuracy of their response on a scale of 1 through 4. Subjects were encouraged to use the entire confidence scale. If the confidence rating was not registered within 5 s of stimulus offset, the trial proceeded as if a confidence rating had been entered. Such trials were omitted from all analyses. There was a 500-ms interval between the entry of confidence rating and the presentation of the memory probe.

The memory probe consisted of a letter and a number, e.g. “T-3.” Subjects judged whether it was true that the letter of the memorized and alphabetized string picked out by the probe number matched the probe letter. For instance, suppose that the initial letter string was “TMLS,” and the memory probe was “T-3.” The “T-3” probe would pose the question, “is it true that the 3rd letter in the alphabetized letter string is a T?” Subjects indicated either “yes” or “no” in response to the probe. In this example, the correct answer is “no,” since the alphabetized string is “LMST”, and the third letter of this string is S, not T. Probe letters were always selected randomly from one of the letters contained in the original letter string. As a consequence of this policy, for one-letter strings, the correct answer was always “yes.” For four-letter strings, the probe letter was chosen randomly. For half of all trials, the probe number corresponded to the true index of the probe letter in the alphabetized string. For the remaining half of all trials, the probe number was chosen randomly from one of the three remaining indices. Thus, for four-letter strings, the correct answer was “yes” for half of all the trials. Grating location, letter string size and correct answer for four-letter strings (“yes” or “no”) were counterbalanced.

If no memory response was entered within 5 s of probe onset, the trial proceeded as if a response had been entered. Such trials were omitted from all analyses. After entry of the memory response, a crosshair was presented centrally for 1200 ms. At the beginning of this interval, a 200-ms tone indicated accuracy for the WM task—a brief high-pitched tone indicated a correct memory response, and a brief low-pitched tone indicated an incorrect response. After this 1200 ms interval passed, the letter string for the next trial was presented. Although subjects were encouraged to do their best on both the visual and memory task, they were not explicitly instructed to prioritize one task over the other. However, it is possible that the task structure implicitly encouraged subjects to prioritize the memory task, since performance feedback was provided only for the memory task.

At the start of each experimental session, subjects completed two practice blocks (20 trials each) and one calibration block (120 trials). In the calibration block, performance on the spatial two-alternative forced choice grating localization task was adjusted continuously between trials on the basis of the subject’s task performance using the QUEST threshold estimation procedure (Watson and Pelli, 1983). In order to shorten trial length, no letter strings or memory probes were presented during the calibration block; each trial consisted only of presentation of the visual stimuli, followed by the subject’s key presses indicating the grating location and decision confidence. Target stimuli were defined as the sum of a grating with Michelson contrast Cgrating and a patch of visual noise with Michelson contrast Cnoise. The total contrast of the target stimulus, Ctarget = Cgrating + Cnoise, was set to 0.9. The nontarget stimulus containing only noise was also set to a Michelson contrast of 0.9. The QUEST procedure was used to estimate the ratio of the grating contrast to the noise contrast, Rg/n = Cgrating/Cnoise, which yielded 72% correct performance in the 2IFC task. Three independent threshold estimates of Rg/n were acquired, with 40 randomly ordered trials contributing to each, and the median estimate of these was used to create stimuli for the main experiment.

In the main experiment, subjects completed eight blocks of 50 trials each, for a total of 400 trials. After each block, subjects were provided with a self-terminated rest period lasting up to 1 min.


Experiment 2


Participants

Thirty Columbia University students participated in the experiment. Participants gave informed consent and were paid $10 for approximately 1 h of participation. The research was approved by the Columbia University’s Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects.

One participant was omitted from data analysis, due to producing outlying data in the perceptual metacognitive task under high WM load (see “Exclusion of outliers” in Materials and methods and).


Experimental procedure

The experimental procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1, with three exceptions. These modifications were made to address several inadequacies in Experiment 1.

First, in the WM task, the probe letter was now allowed to differ from the original letter string for one-letter strings. For one-letter strings, the probe letter matched the original letter for half of all trials, and thus the correct answer for the memory task was “yes” on half of all trials. This change ensured that the Low Load WM task could not be performed trivially by always answering “yes,” as was the case in Experiment 1, and thus that active engagement of memory was required to achieve high performance. As in Experiment 1, however, the probe letter for four-letter strings was always randomly selected from one of the letters contained in the initially presented string.

Second, in the visual discrimination task, two levels of grating contrast, instead of one single level, were used. For the higher level of grating contrast, the ratio Rg/n of grating contrast to noise contrast yielding 72% correct performance in the visual 2AFC task was determined in the calibration block, as in Experiment 1. For the lower level of grating contrast, Rg/n was set to half of the value used for higher grating contrast stimuli. As with the high grating contrast stimuli, the low grating contrast stimuli were defined by adding the low-contrast grating to a white noise pattern, such that the contrast of the grating+noise stimulus as a whole was set to 0.9. Contrast level was counterbalanced with grating location, letter string size and correct answer for the memory task (“yes” or “no”). This change was intended to shed light on the empirical relationship between d’ and meta-d’ by allowing us to measure these variables at two levels of task performance for each subject.

Third, the presentation of one- and four-letter strings was now blocked, rather than randomly interleaved across trials. For 14 subjects, the first 4 blocks (200 trials) of the main experiment contained only one-letter strings, and the last 4 blocks (200 trials) contained only four-letter strings. For the remaining 16 subjects, the order was reversed. Assignment of subjects to the low-load-first and high-load-first conditions was randomized. This change was intended to strengthen the effect of WM load on visual task performance; presumably, any potential effects of high WM load on visual task performance might be potentiated by consistently applying High Load over a long period of time, rather than randomly interleaving high and Low Load trials.


Data analysis for the perceptual task

We measured perceptual and metacognitive performance in the visual task using signal detection theory (SDT) analysis (Green and Swets, 1966; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005; Maniscalco and Lau, 2014). We defined hit rate (HR) as the probability that the subject reported that the grating was on the right, given that the grating was on the right, and false alarm rate (FAR) as the probability that the subject reported that the grating was on the right, given that the grating was on the left. We calculated d’ = z(HR) – z(FAR) and used d’ to quantify sensitivity in the visual discrimination task.

We similarly quantified metacognitive sensitivity, i.e. the efficacy with which confidence ratings discriminate between a subject’s own correct and incorrect responses, with meta-d’ (Maniscalco and Lau, 2012). Specifically, for each WM condition of each subject’s data, we found the value of meta-d’ that jointly maximized the likelihood of the response-specific type 2 relative operating characteristic (ROC) curves, where response-specific type 2 ROC curves are derived from “type 2” probabilities of the general form P(confidence = c | stimulus = s and response = r) for all possible values of confidence (1 – 4), stimulus (“grating on left” or “grating on right”) and response (“grating was on the left” or “grating was on the right”) occurring in this experiment. Maximization of likelihood was achieved using the Optimization Toolbox in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA). Essentially, estimating meta-d’ in this analysis amounts to fitting the SDT model to all such type 2 probabilities for each experimental condition of each subject’s data. Please see Maniscalco and Lau for a more in-depth treatment of the methodology for estimating meta-d’.

According to SDT, perceptual sensitivity and metacognitive sensitivity are directly correlated; as an observer becomes better at performing a perceptual tasks, it theoretically follows that metacognitive sensitivity also improves (Galvin et al., 2003; Maniscalco and Lau, 2012). Meta-d’ is defined such that, if an observer with perceptual sensitivity d’ exhibits metacognitive performance exactly in line with the SDT prediction, then meta-d’ = d’. However, if the observer underperforms SDT expectation, then meta-d’ < d’.

As discussed in Maniscalco and Lau (2012), these observations suggest a useful conceptual distinction between ‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ metacognitive sensitivity. Absolute metacognitive sensitivity concerns how well confidence ratings discriminate correct from incorrect responses overall. Relative metacognitive sensitivity concerns how well confidence ratings discriminate correct from incorrect responses, ‘relative’ to how informative we might expect those confidence ratings to be in light of the observer’s perceptual performance. Whereas absolute metacognitive sensitivity can be measured straightforwardly with meta-d’, relative metacognitive sensitivity can be measured by means of a numerical comparison between meta-d’ and d’. Relative metacognitive sensitivity is a useful construct in that it allows us to take the theoretical relationship between perceptual and metacognitive performance into account when evaluating metacognitive performance, which in turn facilitates discovery of “genuinely” metacognitive effects, as opposed to differences in absolute metacognitive sensitivity that can potentially be attributed to differences in the underlying perceptual task performance.

In Experiment 2, the low grating contrast condition led to unexpectedly low levels of performance in the perceptual task. Average d’ for the low grating contrast stimuli was 0.25, which for an unbiased observer corresponds to a rate of 55% correct responding. One sample t-tests revealed that both d’ and meta-d’ were significantly >0 (i.e. the chance level of responding) in the low-contrast condition (ps < 0.05). However, at these near-chance levels of performance, data are noisy and subject to floor effects. For these reasons, we focus on analyzing only the high-contrast condition of Experiment 2.

Nonetheless, the data from the low contrast condition are useful to the extent that they demonstrate that meta-d’ scales directly with d’ and can be significantly better than chance even when d’ is itself close to chance performance. In turn, this suggests that the function relating d’ and meta-d’ has a y-intercept approximately equal to zero. On the assumption that the function relating d’ and meta-d’ is linear (with a zero y-intercept), the slope of this line would then indicate the quality of metacognitive performance relative to perceptual performance. But the slope of a line with zero y-intercept is just the ratio of y to x. Therefore, computing the ratio meta-d’ / d’ is akin to measuring the slope of the line relating meta-d’ and d’, and thus provides a means of measuring the quality of metacognitive performance, relative to perceptual performance. We therefore compute Mratio = meta-d’/d’ to measure relative metacognitive sensitivity.


Exclusion of outliers

Inspection of the data entering into the analysis of Mratio as a function of WM condition revealed that Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 each had a single subject with outlying data. To quantify this effect, we computed MD, L = MLow Load – MHigh Load – Hard and MD, H = MHigh Load – Easy – MHigh Load – Hard for each subject and converted these measures into z-scores separately for Experiments 1 and 2. We then computed the average of the z-scores for MD, L and MD, H and used this as an index for quantifying the degree to which each subject produced outlying data for Mratio as a function of WM condition. The subjects marked as outliers in had combined z-scores of −3.59 and 3.59, respectively. Across both experiments, no other subject had a combined z-score with an absolute value >1.7. Thus, we excluded the two subjects with extreme combined z-scores from all analyses reported here.


Results

Due to the similarities in experimental design and empirical outcomes in Experiments 1 and 2, we will present the results from these experiments concurrently. The primary analysis of interest is to assess performance in the perceptual task as a function of difficulty of the WM task. We therefore distinguish between Low Load (one-letter memory string) and High Load (four-letter memory string) conditions.

We further categorize the four-letter strings by the degree to which these randomly created strings were initially presented in alphabetical order. Since subjects were required not only to hold the strings in memory but also to alphabetize them, the degree to which the strings were initially well-alphabetized or scrambled could further modulate the resources or processes required to perform the memory task. We classified string alphabetization by counting how many of the three consecutive letter pairs in each four-letter string were in alphabetical order. For instance, in the string ADBC, two consecutive letter pairs are in alphabetical order (AD and BC) but one is not (DB). Strings with two or three letter pairs in alphabetical order were considered to be well alphabetized, and strings with zero or one letter pair in alphabetical order were considered to be poorly alphabetized. We use the term High Load—easy to refer to trials with well-alphabetized four letter strings, and the term High Load—hard to refer to trials with poorly alphabetized four letter strings, where “Easy” and “Hard” denote the difficulty of the alphabetization task.


WM performance

Overall, the WM load manipulation was successful in presenting a challenging WM task, as revealed by separate 2 (WM Load: High, Low) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed-measures analysis of variances (ANOVAs) on accuracy and reaction time in the WM task. Compared to the Low Load condition, High Load decreased accuracy [main effect of WM load, F(1, 49) = 73.17, P < 0.001; Experiment 1: Low Load mean = 97.4% correct, SEM = 1.6%; High Load mean = 77.8% correct, SEM = 2.6%; Experiment 2: Low Load mean = 88.4% correct, SEM = 1.4%; High Load mean = 77.7% correct, SEM. = 2.1%] and increased median reaction time [WM load, F(1, 49) = 238.24, P < 0.001; Expt 1: Low Load mean = 609 ms, SEM = 40 ms; High Load mean = 1537 ms, SEM = 96 ms; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 761 ms, SEM = 32 ms; High Load mean = 1519 ms, SEM = 78 ms]. However, alphabetization difficulty did not affect accuracy (P = 0.4) or median reaction time (P > 0.9) in the memory task.

The main effect of WM load on task performance was modulated by a significant WM Load x Experiment interaction [F(1, 49) = 9.53, P = 0.003]. The source of this interaction was that memory performance under Low Load was significantly better in Experiment 1 than in Experiment 2 [independent samples t-test on% correct, t(49) = 4.72, Bonferroni corrected P < 0.001]. (Median reaction time on the memory task was also faster in Experiment 1, although the WM Load x Experiment interaction for median RT did not achieve significance, P = 0.19.) This difference was due to the fact that the Low Load task was trivial in Experiment 1, as the probe letter was always the same as the one-letter string, whereas in Experiment 2, the probe only matched the one-letter string on half of all trials and thus posed a simple but nontrivial memory demand (see Materials and methods). However, the structure of the memory task under High Load was identical for the two experiments, and here memory performance did not differ for either accuracy or reaction time (ps > 0.8).


Perceptual task performance as a function of WM load

displays d’ and meta-d’ as a function of WM load and alphabetization difficulty. We analyzed this data with separate 2 (WM Load: High, Low) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed design ANOVAs for d’ and meta-d’. In both experiments, WM Load impaired perceptual sensitivity [d’; WM Load, F(1, 49) = 14.11, P < 0.001; WM Load x Experiment, P > 0.9; Expt 1: Low Load mean = 1.88, SEM = 0.14; High Load mean = 1.63, SEM = 0.12; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 1.96, SEM = 0.12; High Load mean = 1.72, SEM = 0.11] and metacognitive sensitivity [meta-d’; WM Load, F(1, 49) = 9.25, P = 0.004; WM Load x Experiment, P = 0.6; Expt 1: Low Load mean = 1.26, SEM = 0.14; High Load mean = 0.95, SEM = 0.13; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 1.25, SEM = 0.12; High Load mean = 1.03, SEM = 0.11].

However, the reduction in meta-d’ due to WM load is qualified by the fact that WM load also reduced d’. Since d’ and meta-d’ theoretically correlate (Galvin et al., 2003; Maniscalco and Lau, 2012), the reduction in meta-d’ under high WM load might be attributable merely to the reduction in d’, rather than to a direct, independent effect on metacognitive performance per se. If WM load impaired metacognitive performance over and above its impairment of perceptual performance, we might expect that WM load would decrease the ratio meta-d’/d’, which we shall hereafter refer to as Mratio. Although Mratio was numerically lower under High Load (Expt 1: Low Load mean = 0.74, SEM = 0.10; High Load mean = 0.61, SEM = 0.08; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 0.68, SEM = 0.09; High Load mean = 0.63, SEM = 0.07), these differences were not statistically significant in the WM Load x Experiment ANOVA (WM Load, P = 0.16; WM load x Experiment, P > 0.5). Thus, we did not find compelling statistical evidence that overall WM load reduces relative metacognitive sensitivity, as measured by Mratio.


Perceptual task performance as a function of WM load and alphabetization difficulty

In order to take into account the effect of alphabetization difficulty, we calculated Mratio separately for the High Load – Easy and High Load – Hard conditions. Scatterplots relating Mratio for these conditions as well as Mratio under Low Load are displayed in. One subject in each of the Experiments 1 and 2 produced outlying data on these plots, and were therefore excluded from all analyses. Inspection of the remaining data suggest that Mratio was lower under the High Load – Hard condition than in the High Load – Easy and Low Load conditions.

To investigate this possibility, we conducted a 2 (WM Demand: Low Load, High Load – Hard) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed-design ANOVA on Mratio, where we use the factor name “WM Demand” rather than “WM Load” to highlight the fact that this factor now subdivides the High Load condition according to alphabetization difficulty. Indeed, we found that, compared with Low Load, High Load – Hard trials impaired Mratio in both experiments [WM Demand, F(1, 49) = 9.47, P = 0.003; WM Demand x Experiment, P = 0.9; Expt 1: Low Load mean = 0.74, SEM = 0.10; High Load – Hard mean = 0.54, SEM = 0.10; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 0.68, SEM = 0.09; High Load – Hard mean = 0.46, SEM = 0.09]. By stark contrast, High Load – Easy strings did not impair Mratio relative to Low Load (WM Demand, P > 0.9; WM Demand x Experiment, P > 0.7; Expt 1: Low Load mean = 0.74, SEM = 0.10; High Load – Easy mean = 0.71, SEM = 0.11; Expt 2: Low Load mean = 0.68, SEM = 0.09; High Load – Easy mean = 0.71, SEM = 0.09). Mratio for High Load – Hard trials was also significantly lower than for High Load – Easy trials [WM Demand, F(1, 49) = 8.12, P = 0.006; WM Demand x Experiment, P > 0.6]. Thus, relative metacognitive sensitivity in the perceptual task was not affected by the overall memorization load placed upon WM, but rather was selectively impaired by the need to perform extensive alphabetization on High Load WM strings. These findings are portrayed in.

We pursued these findings further by investigating the separate effects of alphabetization difficulty under High Load on d’ and meta-d’. A 2 (WM Demand: High Load – Easy, High Load – Hard) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed-design ANOVA on d’ did not reveal any significant effects (WM Demand, P = 0.12; WM Demand x Experiment, P = 0.19; Expt 1: High Load – Easy mean = 1.61, SEM = 0.13; High Load – Hard mean = 1.63, SEM = 0.15; Expt 2: High Load – Easy mean = 1.59, SEM = 0.11; High Load – Hard mean = 1.84, SEM = 0.13). Although the WM Demand x Experiment interaction was not significant (P = 0.19), one might get the visual impression from that d’ differed as a function of WM Demand in Experiment 2 but not Experiment 1. Post-hoc paired t-tests conducted separately for both experimental groups do not yield a significant difference in d’ in Experiment 1 [t(21) = −0.2, Bonferroni corrected P = 1] or Experiment 2 [t(28) = −1.96, Bonferroni corrected P = 0.12]. The marginally significant difference in d’ for Experiment 2 goes in the opposite direction one might have expected, with d’ being numerically higher under the High Load – Hard condition. This nonsignificant difference in d’ in Experiment 2 does not substantively affect the primary effect of interest in this study, which is the influence of WM demand on metacognitive performance while controlling for variation in d’. Notably, in Experiment 2, meta-d’ is lower under the High Load – Hard condition than in the High Load – Easy condition even though d’ is influenced in the opposite direction.

A similar 2 (WM Demand: High Load – Easy, High Load – Hard) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed-design ANOVA for meta-d’ did reveal an effect of alphabetization difficulty [WM Demand, F(1, 49) = 9.31, P = 0.004; WM Demand x Experiment, P > 0.6; Expt 1: High Load – Easy mean = 1.05, SEM = 0.15; High Load – Hard mean = 0.78, SEM = 0.15; Expt 2: High Load – Easy mean = 1.07, SEM = 0.13; High Load – Hard mean = 0.71, SEM = 0.13].

Thus, whereas overall WM load impaired both d’ and meta-d’, the added component of alphabetization difficulty within the High Load condition did not impair d’, but did impose a selective deficit for meta-d’.


Confidence as a function of accuracy and WM demand

Metacognitive sensitivity is determined by how well an observer places confidence ratings to distinguish between correct and incorrect responses. There are several ways in which High Load – Hard trials may have impaired metacognitive performance—e.g. by reducing confidence for correct responses, increasing confidence for incorrect responses, or both. To investigate, we performed a 2 (Accuracy: Correct, Incorrect) x 2 (WM Demand: Low Load, High Load – Hard) x 2 (Experiment: 1, 2) mixed-design ANOVA on confidence in the perceptual task. A significant main effect of Accuracy on confidence [F(1, 49) = 112.51, P < 0.001] reflects the fact that correct visual discrimination responses were associated with higher confidence. Additionally, there was a significant Accuracy x WM Demand interaction [F(1, 49) = 8.26, P = 0.006) which was not modulated by Experiment (Accuracy x WM Demand x Experiment, P > 0.6]. The Accuracy x WM Demand interaction reflects the fact that for High Load – Hard trials, confidence for correct responses decreased whereas confidence for incorrect responses increased, relative to Low Load trials. Qualitatively similar patterns in confidence hold for the comparison of the High Load – Easy and High Load – Hard conditions, although in this case the Accuracy x WM Demand interaction was only marginally significant [F(1,49) = 2.75, P = 0.1]. This pattern can also be seen in the pooled type 2 ROC curves described in more detail in the following section, as for High Load – Hard trials, type 2 false alarm rates increased whereas type 2 HRs decreased relative to Low Load and High Load – Easy trials.

We note that this analysis of the confidence data is intended to shed light on the previous results only in a qualitative way. Mean confidence data has only an indirect relationship to the type 2 ROC curves on which meta-d’ computations are based, in the sense that different type 2 ROC curves can yield the same levels of mean confidence for correct and incorrect responses. Additionally, unlike Mratio, mean confidence data is not adjusted for perceptual task performance. Thus, this analysis can only provide qualitative insight into the source of changes in meta-d’ due to WM Demand.


Pooled type 2 ROC curve analysis

One potential concern with the foregoing analyses is that trial counts were somewhat low, a concession necessary in the task design due to the relatively long duration of each trial. In Experiment 1, 200 trials contributed to the Low Load condition, and roughly 100 trials contributed to each of the High Load – Easy and High Load – Hard conditions. In Experiment 2, for each level of grating contrast, 100 trials contributed to the Low Load condition, and roughly 50 trials contributed to each of the High Load – Easy and High Load – Hard conditions. A recent investigation of the statistical properties of meta-d’ suggests that it has acceptably low levels of bias and variance even when estimated with as few as 50 trials (Barrett et al., 2013). Nonetheless, in order to lend further support to the findings described above, we performed a complementary analysis that pooled data across subjects.

The ideal approach to performing an SDT analysis is to calculate metrics such as d’ separately for each subject, using their individual HR and false alarm rate data. But in cases where within-subject trial counts are a concern but there is ample between-subject data, an alternative approach is to average HRs and false alarm rates across subjects, and use this ‘pooled’ data to perform SDT analysis on the group as a whole (Macmillan and Kaplan, 1985; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). This pooling approach is a legitimate way to analyze the data; for instance, it was used extensively in a classic article demonstrating SDT’s ability to characterize a wide variety of empirical ROC curves (Swets, 1986). Although the pooling approach potentially underestimates sensitivity if subjects have very different values for sensitivity or response bias (Macmillan and Kaplan, 1985), such concerns are mitigated for the present purposes, as we are primarily concerned in analyzing the ‘difference’ in metacognitive sensitivity between two conditions, rather than the overall level of metacognitive sensitivity in a single condition.

For the present purposes, we wish to compare metacognitive performance in the Low Load and the High Load – Hard conditions. Thus, we pooled data across subjects to construct pooled type 2 ROC curves. The type 2 ROC curve is a plot of type 2 HR (i.e. probability of high confidence for correct responses) against type 2 false alarm rate (i.e. probability of high confidence for incorrect responses) (Galvin et al., 2003). The “type 2” designation indicates the task of classifying response accuracy with confidence ratings, in contradistinction to the “type 1” task of performing an objective classification of the stimuli. Because subjects rated confidence on a scale of 1 through 4, three (type 2 FAR, type 2 HR) pairs could be calculated for each subject by separately considering “high confidence” to consist in all confidence ratings >1, all ratings >2 or all ratings >3 (Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). We computed the (type 2 FAR, type 2 HR) pairs for each subject in the Low Load and High Load – Hard conditions and averaged these across subjects. The resulting ROC curves are displayed in. We similarly computed the across-subject average (FAR, HR) for the visual discrimination task, and computed a group d’ from this pooled data. We used this value of pooled d’ to construct the ideal pooled type 2 ROC curve, assuming unbiased responding in the visual discrimination task (Maniscalco and Lau, 2012).

Visual inspection of the pooled type 2 ROC curves confirms that metacognitive performance was worse under the High Load – Hard condition than under the Low Load and High Load – Easy conditions, as under this condition the type 2 ROC curve lies closer to the line of chance metacognitive performance, i.e. the line where type 2 FAR = type 2 HR.

In order to quantify this observation, we performed a bootstrap analysis (Mooney and Duval, 1993). In the bootstrap procedure, the sampling distribution for a variable is estimated by repeatedly resampling with replacement from the original data set and computing the value of the variable for each such bootstrap sample. We constructed 1000 bootstrap samples of the type 1 and type 2 HR and false alarm rate data for each WM Demand condition. For each bootstrap sample, we calculated d’ and estimated meta-d’ by finding the least-squares fit of the meta-d’ model to the type 2 ROC curve (Maniscalco and Lau, 2012). We then analyzed the distribution of values for MD, L = MLow Load – MHigh Load – Hard and MD, H = MHigh Load – Easy – MHigh Load – Hard. For Experiment 1, the mean MD, L was 0.21 and only 3.9% of all bootstrap samples had MD, L < 0, and for Experiment 2, the mean MD, L was 0.28 and only 2% of all bootstrap samples had MD, L < 0. Similarly, for Experiment 1, the mean MD, H was 0.16 and only 6% of all bootstrap samples had MD, H < 0, and for Experiment 2, the mean MD, H was 0.30 and only 1.6% of all bootstrap samples had MD, H < 0. Thus, this complementary bootstrap analysis of the pooled type 2 ROC data provides converging evidence for the claim that metacognitive performance was impaired under the High Load – Hard condition relative to the Low Load and High Load – Easy conditions.


Discussion

In summary, we found that when human subjects performed a WM task concurrently with a perceptual decision making task, performance on the two tasks interacted in interesting ways. First, there was an overall effect of WM load whereby both perceptual (d’) and metacognitive (meta-d’) sensitivity in the perceptual task decreased when longer letter strings had to be maintained in memory. Second, there was a specific effect of the manipulation demand imposed by WM contents on perceptual metacognition. For letter strings that were initially poorly alphabetized, stronger manipulation demand was imposed upon subjects, as they had to perform more mental operations upon WM contents in order to arrive at a properly alphabetized string. This manipulation demand had selective effects upon relative metacognitive sensitivity, as measured by Mratio = meta-d’/d’. When manipulation demand for four-letter WM strings was low (High Load – Easy trials), Mratio did not differ for high and low WM load. But when manipulation demand for four-letter strings was high (High Load – Hard trials), Mratio was significantly lower than in the Low Load and High Load – Easy conditions. Thus, relative metacognitive sensitivity was insensitive to overall WM load, but was selectively impaired when extensive manipulation of WM contents was required.

It is important to interpret these results in light of the theoretical distinction between ‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ metacognitive sensitivity introduced in Maniscalco and Lau (2012). Absolute metacognitive sensitivity refers to the overall efficacy with which confidence ratings discriminate between correct and incorrect responses, as measured e.g. by area under the type 2 ROC curve (Galvin et al., 2003; Fleming et al., 2010). Relative metacognitive sensitivity, or metacognitive efficiency (Fleming and Lau, 2014), evaluates the empirically observed level of absolute metacognitive sensitivity with respect to the ‘expected’ level of absolute metacognitive sensitivity, given an observer’s performance on the primary stimulus classification task. Such an expectation can be derived by the theoretical machinery of SDT (Galvin et al., 2003), with the important features that (i) task performance should place a theoretical limit on metacognitive performance [but see Scott et al. (2014)], and (ii) as task performance improves, so should metacognitive performance. These theoretical predictions have been validated in empirical data (Maniscalco and Lau, 2012).

The SDT measure of absolute metacognitive sensitivity, meta-d’ (Maniscalco and Lau, 2012), was designed with an eye toward providing a straightforward way to measure relative metacognitive sensitivity. Meta-d’ is defined such that, for an observer whose performance conforms to SDT assumptions, meta-d’ = d’. Thus, relative metacognitive sensitivity can be operationalized as a direct numerical comparison between meta-d’ and d’, e.g. a subtraction or division. In this study, we found evidence that the y-intercept of the function relating meta-d’ and d’ is zero. On the assumption that the relationship between d’ and meta-d’ is linear with a y-intercept of zero, the slope of the line provides a constant measure of metacognitive sensitivity across different levels of d’ and can be calculated as the simple ratio meta-d’ / d’. Thus, using meta-d’ / d’ as the measure of relative metacognitive sensitivity for these data is appropriate, given its consistency with the empirical data. For instance, if we suppose that the true function relating meta-d’ and d’ for a constant level of metacognitive sensitivity is given by meta-d’ = 0.8 * d’, then the ratio meta-d’ / d’ would have a constant value of 0.8 regardless of the value of d’ and reflect the true underlying metacognitive sensitivity, whereas the value of the difference meta-d’ – d’ would erroneously differ depending on the value of d’.

In the current data set, although meta-d’ decreased under high WM load, d’ also decreased to a similar extent. Given the known theoretical and empirical dependence of meta-d’ upon d’ (Galvin et al., 2003; Maniscalco and Lau, 2012), it is therefore possible to attribute the decline in meta-d’ under high WM load to the co-occurring decline in d’, rather than supposing that WM load had a direct effect upon metacognition. Indeed, the relative measure of metacognitive sensitivity, meta-d’/d’, did not significantly differ as a function of WM load. Thus, while high WM load imposed an overall deficit in performance on the perceptual task, perhaps due to reduced attentional allocation to the visual stimuli under High Load, we did not find strong evidence that WM load produced a selective deficit upon metacognitive processing in and of itself.

In contrast, we found that relative metacognitive sensitivity in the perceptual task was indeed impaired in the specific case where the contents of WM required a substantial degree of manipulation (alphabetization). This finding is in keeping with prior empirical investigations on the neural bases of visual metacognition and WM performance. Various higher-level regions of the human and monkey PFC, includingdlPFC, rlPFC and aPFC, have been linked to metacognitive performance in visual and memory tasks (Henson et al., 2000; Fleck et al., 2006; Fleming et al., 2010; Tsujimoto et al., 2010; Yokoyama et al., 2010; Fleming et al., 2012; McCurdy et al., 2013). Similarly, dlPFC in particular has been linked to performance in WM tasks, with a strong line of evidence that dlPFC is involved particularly with the ‘manipulation’ and ‘selection’ of WM contents, rather than just the passive maintenance of items in WM (Petrides and Milner, 1982; Petrides, 1989, Owen et al., 1996; D'Esposito et al., 1999; Petrides, 2000; Rowe et al., 2000; Miller and Cohen, 2001; Rowe and Passingham, 2001; Rowe et al., 2002; Bor et al., 2003; Curtis and D'Esposito, 2003). In the current study, the fact that relative metacognitive sensitivity was impaired not by overall WM load, but rather by the specific requirement to extensively manipulate WM contents, suggests that a common cognitive mechanism may contribute to both the manipulation of WM contents and the metacognitive evaluation of visual task performance. In turn, the neuroscience literature suggests that such a common mechanism may be instantiated by the dlPFC.

We note that a somewhat similar finding to the current study was previously reported in the context of visual search tasks by Han and Kim (2004). In that study, the time required to find a visual target in a cluttered display as a function of display set size (search slope) was compared for concurrent WM tasks that either did or did not require active manipulation of WM contents (backwards counting for number items, or alphabetization for letter items). Search slope was significantly steeper than in a control condition when subjects had to manipulate WM contents, but not when subjects had to passively maintain a number or letter string in WM. Thus, as in the present study, Han and Kim found that aspects of processing in a visual task could undergo selective impairment due to the requirement to manipulate WM contents. Han and Kim concluded that aspects of executive functioning, as reflected in manipulation of WM contents, may be required to perform visual search. However, it is unclear to what extent this impairment in visual search is related to the impairment on relative metacognitive sensitivity observed in the current study.

Future work should seek to generalize and extend the present findings. Following previous studies (D'Esposito et al., 1999; Han and Kim, 2004), our task design required subjects to alphabetize letter strings held in WM in order to study the more general cognitive operation of online manipulation of WM contents. We speculate that any task requiring online manipulation of WM contents would exhibit similar interference with metacognition in a concurrent visual task, but this remains to be demonstrated. Additionally, in the present work we have explored only a binary contrast in difficulty of the WM manipulation task (High Load – Easy vs High Load – Hard conditions). These results could be extended by a more parametric modulation of the difficulty of manipulating WM contents. A simple extrapolation from the current findings would predict that continuous increases in WM manipulation difficulty would be accompanied by continuous decreases in relative metacognitive sensitivity.

How might it be the case that a cognitive/neural mechanism that contributes to manipulation of WM contents also contributes to metacognitive evaluation of visual perception? The explanation cannot be an overly general mechanism, such as supposing that additional attentional resources required for the WM task would leave fewer attentional resources for the visual task. Such general mechanisms would presumably induce global changes in visual task performance, affecting both d’ and meta-d’, rather than being specific to meta-d’ / d’.

One potentially trivializing account is that the task design artificially required subjects to use WM mechanisms to evaluate confidence, since subjects indicated their perceptual decision about the visual stimulus with an initial key press and then indicated decision confidence with a second key press. An alternative task design, e.g. one that allowed subjects to indicate perceptual decision and decision confidence simultaneously, might impose less WM demand on the confidence rating. However, this concern is unlikely to account for the present findings. Subjects typically indicated confidence following the initial perceptual decision in fewer than 400 ms (average of median RT for each subject = 387 ms in Experiment 1 and 381 ms in Experiment 2), and median confidence RT following perceptual decision was not affected by WM load (paired t-tests on median confidence RTs for Experiments 1 and 2, ps > 0.7). Thus, the temporal duration of any extra WM demand potentially imposed by the second key press was minimal and unaffected by WM load imposed by the primary memory task. The fast confidence RTs also suggest that subjects may have largely formed their confidence ratings even prior to the first key press about the stimulus itself, rather than delaying the formation of the confidence rating until after the first key press. Importantly, any extra WM load attributable to the process of forming a confidence rating cannot explain the primary finding of the current results, which is that active manipulation of WM contents, rather than passive storage, is what selectively interferes with metacognitive sensitivity. In particular, in comparisons of the High Load – Easy and High Load – Hard conditions, WM load incurred by both the letter string and the perceptual task is equivalent, so differences in metacognition in this contrast can only be attributed to the requirement to actively manipulate WM contents.

One potential mechanism might have to do with strategies for representing and re-representing stimuli. In WM tasks, lateral PFC activation has been associated with encoding strategies for WM contents—when items are presented in a way that facilitates their reorganization into higher-level units or “chunks,” lateral PFC becomes more activated (Bor et al., 2003). Some views hold that metacognition similarly involves the construction of higher-order re-representations or meta-representations of cognitive/neural processing occurring at lower levels in the processing hierarchy (Nelson and Narens, 1990; Schooler, 2002; Cleeremans et al., 2007; Pasquali et al., 2010). If so, it is possible that the same processes involved in manipulating and reorganizing WM contents might also be involved in manipulating and reorganizing sensory representations for the purposes of metacognitive evaluation. Presumably, occupation of such a resource in the manipulation of WM contents would detract from its active employment in the metacognitive evaluation of visual processing, thus impairing relative metacognitive sensitivity.

Another possible set of common underlying mechanisms concerns response selection and the maintenance and flexible adaptation of decision rules. Response selection, defined by Curtis and D’Esposito (2003) as “the operation by which information in short-term storage becomes the focus of attention such that it can be maintained and eventually used to choose an appropriate motor response” (p. 421), has been tied to dlPFC activity in the context of WM tasks (Rowe et al., 2000; Rowe and Passingham, 2001; Rowe et al., 2002; Curtis and D'Esposito, 2003). More broadly, PFC has been theorized to support varying levels of sophistication and abstraction in the control and organization of behavior as a function of stimuli and environmental context, action contingencies, currently active goals and so on (Koechlin and Summerfield, 2007; Badre, 2008). By way of comparison, the SDT model posits that perceptual classification of stimuli and confidence ratings are the outcomes of cognitive decision processes that are not the rigid outcome of low-level perceptual processing but rather can be flexibly adjusted according to the prevailing task instructions, stimulus context and reward contingencies (Tanner and Swets, 1954; Green and Swets, 1966; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). According to SDT, perceptual and metacognitive decisions are determined by defining a set of decision criteria which determine the rules according to which graded and ambiguous internal perceptual evidence is mapped onto discrete perceptual decisions and motor outputs (Green and Swets, 1966; Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). A common mechanism in PFC underlying the processes of selecting, evaluating and manipulating WM contents in the WM task and the processes of metacognitive criterion setting in the perceptual task could potentially explain the results of the current study. Specifically, response selection mechanisms may be more taxed in experimental conditions where the letter string in WM requires more extensive alphabetization; if similar response selection mechanisms govern the process of metacognitive evaluation and criterion setting, then the burden of more extensive alphabetization in the WM task would result in poorer metacognitive efficiency in the perceptual task. The common cognitive theme for both evaluating WM contents by a process of mental manipulation and evaluating decision confidence via criterion setting is that in both processes, the underlying mental content (letter string in WM, or strength of perceptual confidence) is not sufficient to determine a behavioral response, but rather the behavioral response must be mediated by an evaluative decision-making process.

Given that perceptual decision making also requires application of decision rules to sensory evidence, one might wonder what makes the above criterion setting account specific to ‘metacognitive’ criterion setting. One possibility is that perceptual criterion setting for the 2AFC task used in the current study is relatively trivial compared to the metacognitive criterion setting, and therefore is robust to interference from the WM task. If so, it is possible that more challenging perceptual decision making task structures (e.g. visual detection tasks) might exhibit performance deficits under conditions requiring manipulation of WM content. In a detection task, as in confidence rating, to determine an optimal criterion one needs to have some knowledge of the statistics regarding the overall signal strength and noise level. In contrast, in a 2AFC task, the optimal strategy is simply to base one’s response on the sign of the difference of the sensory evidence for the two alternatives, and this strategy does not require knowledge of the statistical properties of sensory evidence across trials.

Alternatively, the distinction between perceptual and metacognitive decision making might be grounded in neuroanatomy. Perceptual decision making has been associated with more posterior regions of PFC (Heekeren et al., 2006), whereas visual metacognition is subserved by more anterior regions of PFC (Fleming et al., 2010; Rounis et al., 2010; Fleming et al., 2012). Since manipulating and applying decision rules to WM contents engages more anterior parts of PFC (D'Esposito et al., 1999; Rowe et al., 2000; Rowe and Passingham, 2001), it may therefore selectively interfere with neural resources dedicated to metacognitive decision making but not general perceptual decision making. Notably, Heekeren et al. (2006) found perceptual decision making to be associated with the posterior DLPFC in Broadmann Area (BA) 8/9, whereas Rowe et al. (2000) found that BA 8 was associated with passive WM maintenance and it was the more anterior BA 46 that was associated with response selection on the basis of WM contents.

Regardless of the specific manner in which manipulation of WM contents influences metacognitive performance, the results of this study demonstrate a dissociation between perceptual and metacognitive sensitivity, suggesting that these depend on separate underlying mechanisms. Indirect evidence for such a position comes from anatomical (Fleming et al., 2010; McCurdy et al., 2013) and fMRI (Henson et al., 2000; Fleck et al., 2006; Yokoyama et al., 2010; Fleming et al., 2012) studies in humans, and single-unit recordings in monkeys (Tsujimoto et al., 2010), which associate metacognitive performance with high-level structures in PFC rather than earlier visual processing regions. Direct evidence comes from studies demonstrating that when PFC function is impaired by transcranial magnetic stimulation or lesion, metacognitive sensitivity in visual tasks is selectively disrupted (Rounis et al., 2010; Fleming et al., 2014). Here we provide another line of direct evidence for a perceptual/metacognitive dissociation by demonstrating the existence of a purely cognitive, task-based intervention that selectively disrupts visual metacognitive performance.


Manipulating word awareness dissociates feed-forward from feedback models of language-perception interactions

Jolien C. Francken, Erik L. Meijs, Odile M. Ridderinkhof, Peter Hagoort, Floris P. de Lange, Simon van Gaal — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC6089086, CC BY 4.0.

Previous studies suggest that linguistic material can modulate visual perception, but it is unclear at which level of processing these interactions occur. Here we aim to dissociate between two competing models of language–perception interactions: a feed-forward and a feedback model. We capitalized on the fact that the models make different predictions on the role of feedback. We presented unmasked (aware) or masked (unaware) words implying motion (e.g. “rise,” “fall”), directly preceding an upward or downward visual motion stimulus. Crucially, masking leaves intact feed-forward information processing from low- to high-level regions, whereas it abolishes subsequent feedback. Under this condition, participants remained faster and more accurate when the direction implied by the motion word was congruent with the direction of the visual motion stimulus. This suggests that language–perception interactions are driven by the feed-forward convergence of linguistic and perceptual information at higher-level conceptual and decision stages.


Introduction

A growing body of evidence shows that language affects perception (e.g. Meteyard et al., 2007; Winawer et al., 2007; Thierry et al., 2009; Landau et al., 2010; Lupyan, 2012). However, it is unclear whether linguistic material changes information processing at low-level sensory stages (perceptual level) or whether these “language-perception interactions” are mediated by effects at higher cognitive levels of representation (conceptual level) or even at later perceptual decision stages. Here, we refer to perception as encompassing both the raw sensory processing of a visual stimulus as well as the transformation of this event into a categorical decision. In this study, we aim to dissociate between two models that favor low-level versus higher-level interactions, respectively. In the first model, which we call the “feedback model” (A), linguistic information is processed in language-specific regions and then feeds back, or is “broadcasted” to lower-level sensory regions to modulate perceptual information processing. For instance, the activation of the semantic representation of the motion-implying word “rise” in the temporal cortex may feedback and affect the sensory representation or processing of visual motion stimuli (i.e. moving dots) in hMT+/V5. This feedback model is one of the dominant views in the field (Meteyard et al., 2007; Lupyan, 2012). In line with this model, and the view that language comprehension reflects an “embodied process” (Barsalou, 2008), words or sentences describing motion have been shown to activate motion-sensitive visual areas that process actual visual motion (Saygin et al., 2010). Similarly, predictive processing theories have proposed that motion words may induce an “automatic top-down prediction” about visual motion, thereby automatically recruiting hMT+/V5, in a way that is similar to how expectation affects visual perception (Hirschfeld and Zwitserlood, 2011; Lupyan, 2012; Summerfield and de Lange, 2014). However, these theories are yet to be experimentally verified.

Alternatively, according to the second model language might influence perception at a later conceptual or decision stage rather than at the sensory stage, which is illustrated by the “feed-forward model.” To illustrate, in this model the motion word “rise” is processed in language-specific regions as well, where it activates its conceptual representation. The visual motion information is first processed in motion-sensitive area hMT+/V5 and subsequently up to a more conceptual level (“up"/"down”). Then, this conceptual representation of the visual stimulus interacts with the conceptual representation of the motion word. In this model, language modulates perception not by directly affecting the sensory processing stage in a top-down manner, but because visual information converges on the same conceptual representation as semantic information. This view is supported by recent neuroimaging evidence (Tan et al., 2008; Klemfuss et al., 2012; Francken et al., 2015): e.g. we have recently shown that the congruency of word-visual motion pairs (e.g. the word “rise” and upward visual motion) is reflected only in higher-order areas [left middle temporal gyrus (lMTG)], with activity in sensory visual areas (hMT+/V5) unchanged (Francken et al., 2015).

In sum, there is empirical support for both the feedback and the feed-forward model of language–perception interactions. Here we present an experimental procedure that allowed us to directly compare key predictions of the two models. Crucially, we manipulated the awareness level and thereby the nature of processing of the linguistic information by means of backward masking. Backward masking is a well-known experimental procedure to render briefly presented stimuli unaware by interspersing it with visual masks. Influential models of awareness in monkey electrophysiology (Lamme et al., 2002) and human imaging studies (Del Cul et al., 2007; Fahrenfort et al., 2007) suggest that backward masking selectively disrupts feedback processing, while leaving feed-forward processing relatively intact (Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000; van Gaal and Lamme, 2012). Because backward masking selectively disrupts feedback processing, this experimental design allowed us to adjudicate between the feed-forward and feedback model of language–perception interactions. Here, masking disrupts the feedback, sometimes also referred to as “broadcasting” (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011), of the linguistic information from language areas in the left temporal lobe to sensory areas involved in word processing as well as sensory areas related to processing of the visual motion stimulus. Since we explore the effects of language on motion perception, we here refer to the latter type of feedback. Thus, the feedback model predicts that masking words will abolish the perceptual effect. In contrast, the feed-forward model predicts that masked words will still affect perception because these effects are supported by feed-forward processing to higher-level conceptual regions only.

Besides this main question, we had two additional questions. First, we were interested in the potential lateralization of (unaware) language–perception interactions. Previous studies have indicated that these interactions might be larger, or exclusively present, for visual information processed in the language-dominant left hemisphere (Gilbert et al., 2006; Francken et al., 2015), although evidence is mixed (Witzel and Gegenfurtner, 2011). Therefore, we explored potential differences in lateralization effects between unmasked and masked words by presenting motion stimuli in the left and right hemifield.

Second, we wondered whether and how decision and control processes that evolve after the actual integration of perceptual and linguistic information might differ between unmasked and masked conditions. Since the motion words refer to upward and downward motion directions, control processes might become activated to suppress this information which might interfere with the motion discrimination task. Previous studies of response conflict (i.e. Stroop or flanker tasks) show that control mechanisms become activated with increasing response time (Ridderinkhof, 2002; Jiang et al., 2013). However, at present, it is undecided whether these mechanisms are dependent on awareness of thecongruency of the stimulus or whether masked stimuli can evoke these conflict-control mechanisms as well (Kunde et al., 2012).


Materials and methods


Participants

Thirty-eight healthy, right-handed participants with normal or corrected-to-normal vision (2 males, 36 females; age range: 18–29 years) took part in the two sessions of this experiment. All participants were native Dutch speakers and reported having no reading problems. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee and a written informed consent was obtained from the participants according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Compensation was 25 Euros, or course credit.


Stimuli

Stimuli were generated using the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997) within MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA), and displayed on an ASUS LCD computer monitor (refresh rate 60 Hz, 1920 x 1080 resolution, size 50.9 x 28.6 cm). Stimuli were presented in white on a light-gray background. The visual random-dot motion (RDM) stimuli consisted of white dots (density = 2.5 dots/deg2; speed = 6.0°/s) plotted within a circular aperture (radius 7.5°). On every trial, the RDM stimulus was presented on either the left or right side of the screen (8.5° horizontal eccentricity from fixation to center of circular aperture) for 200 ms. In the first frame of the RDM stimulus, a random configuration of dots was presented within the annulus. Subsequently, on every frame a certain percentage of the dots was replotted consistently in one direction (upward or downward) on the next frame (see “Procedure”). Dots moving outside of the annulus and other remaining dots were replotted at a random location within the annulus.

Five verbs describing each direction of motion (in Dutch, here translated to English; upward: grow, ascend, rise, climb, go up; downward: sink, descend, drop, dive, go down), and 10 nonmotion verbs (bet, mourn, exchange, glow, film, rest, cost, sweat, wish, relax) were used in the experiment. Motions words and neutral words were matched for lexical frequency (taken from the CELEX database) and word length (5–8 letters) (both P > 0.2). Masks were randomly generated combinations of 10 consonant strings. Both words and masks were presented at the center of the screen, using capital letters in a mono-spaced font.


Procedure

Participants performed a motion discrimination task (upward vs. downward motion) on a visual RDM stimulus (B). A central fixation cross (width 0.4 degrees) was presented throughout the trial, except when a word, mask or blank screen was presented. Each trial started with a centrally presented forward mask (50 ms) followed by a word (33 ms), which could either be a motion word or a nonmotion (neutral) word. Presentation of the words was pseudorandom within each block of the experiment. Awareness of the word was manipulated by presenting either backward masks (2 x 33 ms; unaware condition) or a blank screen (67 ms; aware condition) after word presentation. A short interstimulus interval (ISI) of 17 ms was always present after either of these screens. Next, a visual RDM stimulus was presented (200 ms) in either the left visual field (LVF) or in the right visual field (RVF). Participants had to indicate as quickly and accurately as possible whether the RDM contained upward or downward motion, while maintaining fixation at the central cross. The brief presentation time of the RDM stimulus served to minimize the chance of eye movements to the stimulus, as saccade latencies are in the order of ∼200 ms (Carpenter, 1988). Participants were instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as possible by pressing a keyboard button with either the index or middle finger of the right hand (counterbalanced across participants). The intertrial interval (ITI) was 1000–1166 ms.

In 10% of the trials, the motion discrimination task was followed by an additional task assessing the visibility of the words. Here, participants indicated whether the word presented earlier in the trial was a motion or a nonmotion word. These catch trials were included for two reasons. First, they ensured attention to the words, which enhances processing of the primes in both unmasked and masked conditions (Naccache et al., 2002; Spruyt et al., 2012). Second, catch trials were used to estimate word awareness. Participants were instructed to always respond to the catch question. They were explicitly told that there was a 50% chance of either motion or nonmotion words (10 different words of each category) in the catch trials. Note that nonmotion words were solely included to test for the visibility of the words.

The experiment consisted of two 1-h sessions on separate days within 1 week. In the first session, participants performed a training phase to familiarize them with the task and assess their individual motion coherence threshold at which they performed the motion discrimination task at 75% correct. Participants first practiced the motion discrimination task in three blocks with fixed coherence levels (80%, 55% and 30% respectively). The coherence level of the next training block was adjusted on the basis of performance in the previous blocks. The coherence level after the fourth training block was taken as the starting point for the Bayesian adaptive staircase procedure (Watson and Pelli, 1983), which was run separately for LVF and RVF stimuli. This was done to yield comparable task difficulty and performance in both visual fields and for all participants. The threshold for discrimination was defined as the percentage of coherent motion for which the staircase procedure predicted 75% accuracy. In both the remaining training blocks and the experiment, the coherence level was fixed within a block. The same Bayesian staircase procedure ran throughout the block; however, the actual coherence level was updated only between blocks (based on the estimate after the last trial of a block) to accommodate potential practice and fatigue effects over the course of the experiment. In the final training blocks, participants practiced the discrimination task while the words were presented and the catch task was added. During training, we provided participants with trial-by-trial feedback for both the motion task (except for the threshold estimation block) and the catch trial task by means of a green or red fixation cross for correct and incorrect responses, respectively. The training was followed by a practice phase, in which participants completed 440 trials (5 blocks of 88 trials) of the actual experimental task to familiarize them with the task and to avoid practice effects in the actual experimental blocks. On the second day, participants first completed a short training (88 trials). The experiment on the second day consisted of 10 blocks of 80 trials (800 trials in total). All analyses reported here are based on the 10 experimental blocks in this final session. Summary feedback (percentage correct) was provided during the break after each block.

One participant was excluded because performance on the unmasked trials of the motion discrimination task was <60% correct. Therefore, analyses were performed on 37 participants.


Statistical analysis

We calculated congruency effects for reaction times (RT) on correct trials and error rates (ER). On congruent trials, the motion described by the word matched the direction of visual motion, e.g. “rise” followed by a stimulus with upward moving dots. On incongruent trials, the motion described by the word and the direction of visual motion did not match. Missed trials and trials with RTs that were >3 SD than the individual subject mean RT were excluded from the analyses (in total 2.3%). Each of the two behavioral measures was subjected to a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), including factors “Congruency” (congruent, incongruent), “Awareness” (aware, unaware) and “Visual Field” (LVF, RVF).

To further assess the potentially different effects of unmasked and masked words on motion perception, we used Bayesian Statistics (Jeffreys, 1961; Rouder et al., 2009) and delta plots (Ridderinkhof, 2002). Previous studies have indicated that language–perception interactions might be larger, or exclusively present, for visual information processed in the language-dominant left hemisphere (Gilbert et al., 2006; Francken et al., 2015), while others have failed to replicate these effects (Witzel and Gegenfurtner, 2011). To differentiate between the presence and absence of evidence for the null hypothesis (no lateralization of congruency effects), we calculated Bayes Factors (BFs). BFs express evidence ratios between hypotheses, and therefore provide direct information about the relative likelihood of the alternative vs. the null hypothesis. A BF of ∼1 indicates no preference for either the null or the alternative hypothesis, and in large samples BFs will converge to either 0 or infinity when the null or alternative hypothesis is true respectively (Rouder et al., 2009). By convention, a BF likelihood ratio of >3/1 provides moderate evidence for the alternative hypothesis, >10/1 provides strong evidence for the alternative hypothesis and >30/1 provides very strong evidence for the alternative hypothesis (Jeffreys, 1961). Equivalently, a BF of <1/3 provides moderate support for the null hypothesis, <1/10 provides strong support for the null hypothesis and <1/30 provides very strong support for the null hypothesis. BF ratios between 1/3 and 3/1 provide no evidence for either the null or alternative hypothesis.

Second, we wondered whether decision and control processes might become activated with increasing response time to suppress the interference of the task-irrelevant linguistic information with the motion discrimination task. Therefore, we calculated delta plots (reflecting the RT congruency effects for different RT bins) and conditional accuracy functions (reflecting the ER congruency effects for different RT bins) to assess the congruency effects across the response time distribution. For each visibility condition, every participant’s trials (correct trials only) were sorted on RT and subsequently equally divided over 10 RT bins (separate bins for congruent and incongruent trials). Next we performed a repeated measures ANOVA including factors “Congruency” (congruent, incongruent), “Awareness” (aware, unaware) and “RT bin” (1 to 10). Previous studies show that the build-up of suppression of interference is maximal at the slowest RT bins (Ridderinkhof, 2002; Forstmann et al., 2008; Jiang et al., 2013). Therefore, we performed additional planned paired t-tests on RTs between the first (second minus first RT bin) and last (tenth minus ninth RT bin) slopes to assess whether conflict control became stronger over response time in the current study as well. The strength of automatic response activation by the motion words is inferred from the pattern of errors present at the fastest RT bins. Stronger response capture is associated with a higher percentage of fast errors (Ridderinkhof, 2002). Thus, the critical measure for conflict control effects on ERs was the presence of a three-way interaction between congruency, awareness and RT bin.

To assess the awareness of the words, we calculated the accuracy and d’ in the catch trials. Percentage correct was defined as the percentage of trials on which participants correctly indicated whether the word was a motion word or not. d' is an unbiased measure of the discriminability sensitivity of the observer (Macmillan and Creelman, 2005). d’ for the unmasked and masked conditions were first compared to each other using paired t-tests and subsequently compared with zero using one-sample t-tests. Following this, we used the accuracy in binomial tests to determine for every participant whether the performance was above chance (50% correct). In addition, we calculated correlations between d’ and congruency effects. We used a regression approach, referred to as Greenwald’s method (Greenwald et al., 1995) to test whether the reported congruency effects were still significant when discrimination performance was extrapolated to zero visibility (d’ = 0) [see Greenwald et al. (1995) and Hannula et al. (2005) for further discussion and justification of this method]. Finally, we split the participants into a low visibility (d' < median) and a high visibility (d' > median) group and we performed an ANOVA across the masked conditions with the factors Congruency (2) and Group (2) to test for potential differences between the congruency effects (CE) of the low and high visibility groups.


Results


Word discriminability

We excluded 4 of 37 participants whose discrimination performance of the masked words was above chance level (binominal test, P < 0.1), because for these four participants we could not be sure that they were unable to discriminate the masked words. On a group level (for the remaining 33 participants), the discriminability of the words (motion vs. no motion) was markedly lower when the words were masked (unaware condition) than when they were not masked (aware condition) [difference t(32) = 10.22, P < 0.001; unaware d' = 0.16, corresponding to 52.8% correct responses, t(32) = 2.57, P = 0.015; aware d' = 2.25, 84.0% correct, t(32) = 11.11, P < 0.001]. To assess whether residual visibility of the masked motion words is responsible for any of the effects on visual motion perception, we performed several control analyses (see below).


Do masked motion words affect visual motion perception?

We first focus on the effects of word awareness on word-motion congruency. Participants responded faster to the motion stimuli when they were preceded by a congruent motion word than by an incongruent motion word (main effect of congruency: F1,32 = 80.11, P < 0.001). This congruency effect was modulated by word awareness (congruency x awareness: F1,32 = 46.20, p < 0.001), indicating that the difference between congruent and incongruent conditions was larger when the words were unmasked than when they were masked. Crucially, however, the congruency effect was present both when the words were unmasked (congruent: RT = 335 ms; incongruent: RT = 395 ms; ΔRT = 60 ms, F1,32 = 69.60, P < 0.001; A), and when they were masked (congruent: RT = 350 ms; incongruent: RT = 356 ms; ΔRT = 6 ms, F1,32 = 6.77, P = 0.014).

The congruency effects in error rates go in the same direction for both unmasked and masked words. On average, participants answered 81.3% of trials correctly (±6.7%, mean ± SD) at an average motion coherence level of 48.1% for the LVF (±18.3%, mean ± SD) and 46.5% for the RVF (±16.3%, mean ± SD). Participants made fewer errors for congruent compared to incongruent trials (main effect of congruency: F1,32 = 130.19, P < 0.001; aware: congruent: 11.3%; incongruent: 26.9%; ΔER = 15.6%, F1,32 = 126.34, P < 0.001; unaware: congruent: 17.8%; incongruent: 19.9%; ΔER = 2.1%, F1,32 = 10.89, P = 0.002; B). Again, the congruency effect was larger for unmasked words than for masked words (congruency x awareness F1,32 = 81.30, P < 0.001).

The word discrimination trials, interspersed throughout the experiment, revealed that performance (visibility) was low for masked words (52.8% correct responses). However, on a group level, visibility was higher than chance level. Therefore, to check whether incidental word visibility might have been responsible for the observed congruency effects, we performed several control analyses. First, if incidental word visibility were responsible for the observed congruency effects, one would expect reliable positive correlations between discrimination scores (d’) and congruency effects. However, this was not the case for RTs (rs = 0.17, P = 0.34) and ERs (rs = 0.19, P = 0.28). Further, we used a regression approach, referred to as Greenwald’s method (Greenwald et al., 1995) to test whether the reported congruency effects were still significant when discrimination performance was extrapolated to zero visibility (d’ = 0). Indeed, the linear regression analyses revealed a significant intercept for ERs (intercept = 1.73, P = 0.018) and a trend for RTs (intercept = 5.42, P = 0.069) which, although not conclusive, further suggests that congruency effects were induced by masked words that could not be perceived consciously. Next, we split the participants (n = 33) into a low visibility (d' < median, n = 16) and a high visibility (d' > median, n = 17) group. An ANOVA across the masked conditions indicated that there were no significant differences between the congruency effects (CE) between the low and high visibility groups (ERs: low visibility group CE = 1.7%; high visibility group CE = 2.4%; F1,31 = 0.29, P = 0.59; BF: 1/3.5; RTs: low visibility group CE = 3 ms; high visibility group CE = 10 ms; F1,31 = 1.52, P = 0.23; BF: 1/2.1). Below, we will describe qualitative differences between the masked and unmasked condition that further suggest that subjects were unable to perceive the masked words (Jacoby, 1991; Merikle et al., 2001).

In summary, both RTs and ERs showed that masked words influenced motion perception, although to a lesser extent than words that were not masked. These results are in line with feed-forward models explaining the effects of language on perception, but not with feedback models.


Spatial characteristics of language–perception interactions

We reasoned that masked and unmasked words might influence perception in qualitatively different ways, due to the different neural processes involved in both situations (feed-forward vs. recurrent/feedback processing, respectively). First, we tested whether the congruency effect for masked and unmasked conditions was differentially modulated by the visual field in which the visual motion stimuli were presented. For both RTs and ERs, there was no interaction between congruency, awareness and visual field (both Ps > 0.7; RTs: aware: ΔRT LVF: 56 ms, ΔRT RVF: 62 ms; unaware: ΔRT LVF: 5 ms, ΔRT RVF: 8 ms; ERs: aware: ΔER LVF: 15.5%, ΔER RVF: 15.7%; unaware: ΔER LVF: 2.1%, ΔER RVF: 2.1%). Frequentist statistics provide a measure of confidence in rejecting the null hypothesis, but not a measure of confidence in the null hypothesis itself. In order to verify the true absence of lateralized effects, we calculated BFs separately for both masking conditions. We observed moderate evidence (BF < 1/3) for the null hypothesis, indicating no effects of visual field on congruency for both masked and unmasked conditions, both in terms of RTs and ERs (aware: RTs: BF = 1/4.5; ERs: BF = 1/7.2; unaware: RTs: BF = 1/6.2; ERs: BF = 1/7.4).


Temporal characteristics of language–perception interactions

Our previous analyses suggest that language influences perception at higher-level conceptual or decision stages (in a feed-forward manner) rather than at low-level sensory stages (in a feedback manner). Therefore, in follow-up analyses, we explored the possible differences in decision and control processes that evolve after the actual integration of perceptual and linguistic information for masked and unmasked conditions. To do so, we calculated the so-called “delta plots,” reflecting the RT congruency effects for different RT bins and “conditional accuracy functions,” reflecting the ER congruency effects for different RT bins, to assess the congruency effects across the response time distribution (Ridderinkhof, 2002; Forstmann et al., 2008; Jiang et al., 2013). The delta plots for the unmasked condition showed the typical RT conflict-control profile (Ridderinkhof, 2002; Forstmann et al., 2008; Jiang et al., 2013). The congruency effects first increased over response time (congruency x RT bin: F1,32 = 24.47, P < 0.001) and later decreased in the last bin (2nd–1st vs. 10th–9th bin: T32 = 2.35, P = 0.025; C). There was a significant difference between the congruency effects for masked and unmasked conditions over response time (congruency x awareness x RT bin: F1,32 = 13.08, P < 0.001) driven by the overall increase in the congruency effect for unmasked but not for masked words. Interestingly, for masked words, the congruency effect was not affected by response time (congruency x RT bin: F1,32 = 1.39, P = 0.19) and the RT delta plot did not show the typical control-related decrease in the congruency effect for the last RT bin (2nd–1st vs. 10th–9th bin: T32 = −0.06, P = 0.955; difference between aware and unaware conditions: T32 = 1.47, P = 0.15). Thus, for the unmasked condition, we found a quick increase in the RT congruency effect with response time, followed by a later decrease, probably as a consequence of the activation of interference control mechanisms. In the masked condition, however, RT congruency effects were stable over RT bins and did not show any of the control-dynamics as observed in the unmasked condition. The strength of automatic response activation by the motion words is inferred from the pattern of errors present at the shortest RT bins. Stronger response capture is associated with a higher percentage of fast errors (Ridderinkhof, 2002). Again, for accuracy there was a significant three-way interaction (congruency x awareness x RT bin: F1,32 = 3.54, P < 0.001), indicating differential effects of response time on congruency for the unmasked and masked conditions. For the unmasked condition, the congruency effect decreased over response time (congruency x RT bin: F1,32 = 7.59, P < 0.001), thus showing the typical pattern of these conditional accuracy functions. In contrast, the masked condition showed no modulation over RT bins (congruency x RT bin: F1,32 = 1.35, P = 0.22; D). Thus, only for the unmasked words a large ER congruency effect was present for the fast RT bins, which is in line with the fact that voluntary control mechanisms take time to be initiated. In the masked condition, however, the data pattern was very different and again, like for RT, did not show any of these control-dynamics. Note that this last set of analyses also further suggests that the masked words were invisible. We observed qualitative differences in the effects of masked vs. unmasked motion words on voluntary control mechanisms, but similar effects on congruency effects (reflecting language–perception interactions). These qualitative differences are generally considered as convincing evidence for unconscious perception (Jacoby, 1991; Merikle et al., 2001).

In sum, when the word and the motion stimulus were congruent, both unmasked and masked words sped up motion discrimination and increased discrimination performance compared to incongruent word–motion pairs. Language–perception interactions were equally present for visual stimuli presented in the left and right hemifield, but only in the unmasked condition were voluntary control mechanisms activated across response time to reduce linguistic interference.


Discussion

We investigated whether language affects perception in a feed-forward or a feedback manner by disrupting the processing of motion words by means of backward masking. The rationale behind this experimental design is that feedback processing is disrupted by masking, as revealed by empirical evidence from monkey electrophysiology and human neuroimaging studies (Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000; Lamme et al., 2002; Del Cul et al., 2007; Fahrenfort et al., 2007). Hence, the feedback model predicts that interactions between language and perception will be abolished under masked conditions. Since backward masking does not affect feed-forward processing, the feed-forward model predicts that effects of language on perception will still be present when the words are masked. Our results support the feed-forward model: when motion words were masked, motion words that were congruent with the direction of the visual motion stimulus resulted in faster and more accurate visual motion direction discrimination relative to incongruent conditions. Thus, our results suggest that language changes perception at a higher, conceptual level, rather than at the lower, sensory level. With several control analyses, we verified that our results are unlikely driven by residual visibility of the masked motion words.

A number of previous studies are in line with this interpretation. We recently found that congruent word–motion pairs elicit higher BOLD activity than incongruent combinations in the left middle temporal gyrus (Francken et al., 2015), an area involved in both lexical retrieval and semantic integration (Hagoort et al., 2009; Menenti et al., 2011). Crucially, there were no effects in motion-sensitive visual areas such as hMT+/V5. Interestingly, support for this effect was also found by an fMRI study in which linguistic material was only implicitly included. Tan et al. (2008) had participants judge whether two colored squares had the same or a different color. Even though the linguistic color vocabulary was irrelevant for the perceptual discrimination task, left temporo-parietal circuits associated with word-finding processes were activated more strongly when subjects had to discriminate between hard-to-name colors compared to easy-to-name colors. These studies indicate that the interaction between language and perception is mediated by “language areas” that integrate linguistic and visual information. These data stand in sharp contrast to previous proposals that linguistic material describing motion elicits a “perceptual simulation” in low-level visual areas similar to actually seeing motion (Saygin et al., 2010).

How does language change perceptual decision making according to the feed-forward model? We reason that visual motion stimuli might be conceptually categorized as reflecting evidence for “upward” and “downward” motion directions, since participants are required to make a categorical perceptual decision. This may cause conceptual representations to be automatically activated (Tan et al., 2008; Thierry et al., 2009), even though they are not required for task performance. If the conceptual representation activated by the visual motion stimulus matches the conceptual representation that is activated by the motion word, this then results in more activity in lMTG (Francken et al., 2015), as well as improved behavioral performance. It is also possible that language–perception interactions take place at an even later decision stage. Taken together, the reason why masked (unaware) words are still able to change perception according to the feed-forward model is that the interaction does not depend on feedback of linguistic information to sensory areas. The only requirement is that the masked words are semantically processed, which does indeed occur despite backward masking (Kouider and Dehaene, 2007; van Gaal and Lamme, 2012). Although we show that feed-forward processing is sufficient for language–perception interactions to occur, our data cannot adjudicate whether larger congruency effects under unmasked conditions are due to additional feedback processing or increased stimulus strength.

Proponents of the feedback model argue that language–perception interactions might be dependent on visual “mental imagery,” which is the conscious, internal generation of images (Kosslyn et al., 2001). This process would require feedback from regions up in the cortical hierarchy together with language areas in order to affect low-level sensory processing. For example, when reading stories describing motion events, participants showed a motion aftereffect illusion, which can be interpreted as evidence for direction-selective motion adaptation in the visual system (Dils and Boroditsky, 2010). Interestingly, individuals differed in how early in the story the effect appeared, and this difference was predicted by the strength of an individual’s motion aftereffect following explicit motion imagery. Thus, when imagery is sufficiently vivid, language appears to induce changes in the visual system. However, by showing that masked words can still influence perception, we demonstrate here that mental imagery cannot account for all instances of linguistic modulations of perception.

We further qualified the spatial and temporal characteristics of the language–perception interactions. First of all, we did not observe any lateralization of the reported effects. Interestingly, in our previous study in which words were unattended, but not masked, the RT effect (but not the accuracy effect) was lateralized to the right visual field (Francken et al., 2015). Therefore, our findings provide an alternative explanation for the often reported (and debated) observation that language exerts stronger effects for stimuli presented in the right visual field (Gilbert et al., 2006; Regier and Kay, 2009; Witzel and Gegenfurtner, 2011). This lateralization is explained by the fact that information from the right visual field would have preferential access to the left-lateralized language system (Gilbert et al., 2006; Regier and Kay, 2009; Klemfuss et al., 2012). Although this is an intuitively appealing idea, our data suggest that this depends on the degree to which the linguistic information is attended: unattended stimuli might show lateralized effects, whereas attended stimuli might not. Future studies are clearly needed to further explore this hypothesis in more detail.

Finally, we observed that decision and control processes that evolve after the integration of perceptual and linguistic information differed between unmasked and masked conditions. In line with previous studies of response conflict (Ridderinkhof, 2002), we reasoned that to suppress the interference of the task-irrelevant words, inhibitory control mechanisms might be activated with increasing response times. Interestingly, these control dynamics were uniquely observed for unmasked words. Thus, although masked words have the power to change perceptual decisions about motion direction, late voluntary control mechanisms to suppress the irrelevant linguistic information were not activated (Tsushima et al., 2006). First, this finding provides evidence for the notion that there was a clear qualitative difference in awareness between the masked and unmasked conditions. Second, these results inform recent discussions about the role of consciousness in cognitive control and the potential control processes that can unconscious stimuli might be able to affect or even initiate (Kunde et al., 2012; van Gaal et al., 2012; Ansorge et al., 2014). Previously, it has been shown that masked stimuli that “explicitly” signal the need for control (e.g. an unconscious stop-signal or an unconscious task-switching cue) can elicit behavioral and neural indices of control behavior (Lau and Passingham, 2007; van Gaal et al., 2008). However, it has recently been argued that “implicit” cues, such as specific task properties that have to be derived from repeated exposure to the trials, might not (Kunde et al., 2012). Because in the present experiment masked words were not explicitly associated with control processes, and are in fact irrelevant to perform the motion discrimination task, this might be a situation in which control processes are dependent on awareness. However, some previous studies using nonverbal material (i.e. arrow stimuli) in typical priming tasks have observed control mechanisms irrespective of conflict awareness (van Gaal et al., 2010; Francken et al., 2011; Desender et al., 2013), although evidence is mixed (Kunde, 2003; Ansorge et al., 2011) (for reviews see Ansorge et al., 2014; Kunde et al., 2012). It might be that with the current set-up initial conflict was too small to initiate further control operations in the masked condition (Kunde et al., 2012). Future studies should be performed to further explore in which situations control operations can be triggered implicitly (and explicitly) and in which situations it cannot, and what factors underlie these differences.

In conclusion, here we have manipulated word awareness in a visual motion discrimination task to explore at what level of processing the influence of language on perception takes place. Specifically, we were able to dissociate feed-forward models from feedback models of language–perception interactions. We observed a clear influence of language on motion discrimination for both masked (unaware) and unmasked (aware) words. Because feed-forward processing remains intact whereas feedback to low-level sensory areas is disrupted by masking, these results can only be explained by a feed-forward model. Therefore, these findings provide evidence for the hypothesis that language–perception interactions occur at stages beyond low-level sensory regions and are mainly driven by interactions at higher-level conceptual and decision stages.


Are we ever aware of concepts? A critical question for the Global Neuronal Workspace, Integrated Information, and Attended Intermediate-Level Representation theories of consciousness

David Kemmerer — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC6089087, CC BY 4.0.

To locate consciousness in the flow of synaptic activity in the brain, we must first locate it in the flow of information processing in the mind. Two different positions have been debated for centuries. The liberal view maintains that the contents of experience include not only sensory, motor, and affective states, but also concepts and the thoughts they enter into. In contrast, the conservative view maintains that concepts have no intrinsic qualia of their own, and that the contents of experience are therefore restricted to sensory, motor, and affective states. Here I discuss how this long-standing controversy is relevant to several contemporary neuroscientific theories of consciousness. I do so, however, in a manner that is admittedly biased toward the conservative view, since I am among those who believe that it is more consistent than the liberal view with a number of key findings. I focus first on two of the most prominent neuroscientific theories of consciousness—namely, Stanislas Dehaene's Global Neuronal Workspace Theory and Giulio Tononi's Integrated Information Theory. I argue that because both of these approaches assume the liberal view, they are challenged in significant ways by data favoring the competing conservative view. I then turn to a third framework—namely, Jesse Prinz's Attended Intermediate-Level Representation Theory. I contend that because it explicitly endorses the conservative view, it has a unique advantage over the other two approaches. I also point out, however, that it has independent shortcomings that prevent it from achieving adequate explanatory coherence. I conclude by emphasizing that, if the conservative view is in fact correct, a central goal of future research should be to distinguish, at both psychological and neurobiological levels of analysis, between the following two kinds of information processing that often occur simultaneously: first, activation of the modality-specific sensory, motor, and affective representations that constitute the sole ingredients of conscious experiences; and second, activation of the conceptual representations that give those experiences meaning and that may even influence them in a top-down manner, but that never themselves reach awareness.


Introduction

Research on consciousness has made numerous advances during the past 25 years (Boly et al., 2013; Block et al., 2014). However, apart from a few notable exceptions (Miller, 2007; Melloni and Singer, 2010; Aru et al., 2012b; de Graaf et al., 2012; Prinz, 2012; Pitts et al., 2014a), progress in elucidating the neural correlates of consciousness has been hampered by a lack of sufficient attention to the cognitive correlates of consciousness—that is, to the forms of mental representation that actually reach awareness. This is a critical issue, since the boundaries of what have been called “the admissible contents of experience” (Hawley and Macpherson, 2011) necessarily impose strict constraints on theories of how and why the brain generates consciousness.

Although this issue has not been adequately addressed in the neuroscientific literature, it has been the focus of intense debate in the philosophy of mind and related fields (for a recent collection of papers, see Bayne and Montague, 2012a). The main controversy revolves around the question of whether it is possible for the highest levels of mental representation—in particular, concepts and the thoughts they enter into—to ever achieve consciousness when activated. The two most frequently distinguished positions are the liberal and conservative views, both of which are summarized below. (A terminological note: Throughout this article, the words consciousness, awareness, and experience are used interchangeably.)


The liberal view

The central claim of the liberal view is that although concepts do not always reach awareness when activated, they frequently do, and in those situations they bring about a particular kind of experience that cannot be reduced to any form of verbal or nonverbal imagery but is instead distinctively cognitive in nature. This unique type of awareness is sometimes called “cognitive phenomenology” or “cognitive qualia,” and it ostensibly cuts across the entire spectrum of mental activities that employ concepts, including thinking and reasoning, producing and comprehending language, and categorizing objects and events in the world. As Bayne and Montague (2012b) point out, the liberal view has a long and illustrious history, having been endorsed by such luminaries as René Descartes, John Locke, George Berkeley, David Hume, Franz Brentano, Edmund Husserl, Immanuel Kant, William James, and G.E. Moore. In the early 20th century, the core members of the famous Würzburg school of psychology—namely, Oswald Külpe, Narziss Ach, and Karl Bühler—claimed to have discovered introspective evidence for a pure form of cognitive phenomenology that they called non-imagistic thought. And more recently, a number of philosophers have upheld the position that consciousness is not limited to the senses but encompasses high-level semantic knowledge too. Here are a few representative examples, mostly drawn from Bayne and Montague (2012b):In addition to arguing that there is something it is like to think a conscious thought, I shall also argue that what it is like to think a conscious thought is distinct from what it is like to be in any other kind of conscious mental state, and that what it is like to think the conscious thought that p is distinct from what it is like to think any other conscious thought … (Pitt, 2004, p. 2)Intentional states have a phenomenal character, and this phenomenal character is precisely the what-it-is-like of experiencing a specific propositional-attitude vis-à-vis a specific intentional content. Change either the attitude-type (believing, desiring, wondering, hoping, etc.) or the particular intentional content, and the phenomenal character thereby changes too. (Horgan and Tienson, 2002, p. 522)… generally, as we think—whether we are speaking in complete sentences, or fragments, or speaking barely or not at all, silently or aloud—the phenomenal character of our noniconic thought is in continual modulation, which cannot be identified simply with changes in the phenomenal character of either vision or visualization, hearing or auralization, etc. (Siewert, 1998, p. 282, emphasis suppressed)When I am now phenomenally aware of the telephone on my desk, I am aware of it as a telephone and as located at a particular place in my world ….Introspectively, all of this information is experienced as at least implicitly present as part of the phenomenal content of my perceptual state. (van Gulick, 1994, p. 34, emphasis added)The liberal view is elaborated and defended more fully in the following additional references: Strawson, Siegel (2005), Bayne (2009), Horgan (2012), Nes (2012), Pitt (2012), Shields (2012), Siewert (2012), Woodruff-Smith (2012), Jorba and Vicente (2014), and Chudnoff (2015).


The conservative view

In sharp contrast to the liberal view, the conservative view maintains that we are never directly aware of concepts per se; instead, consciousness is always restricted to sensory, motor, and affective states. Proponents of this position typically argue that even though it sometimes seems as if our thoughts are conscious, this is just an illusion that stems from the tendency to mistakenly treat the verbal and nonverbal images that often accompany certain thoughts as being equivalent to the conceptual contents of those thoughts. Advocates of the conservative view also believe that while concepts can certainly influence perception (Hansen et al., 2006; Meteyard et al., 2007; Gendron et al., 2012; Lupyan and Ward, 2013), we only experience the sensory effects of such top-down processes, never the high-level causes. Bayne and Montague (2012b) note that just as the liberal view has a rich historical background, so does the conservative view. Challenging the Würzburg psychologists mentioned above, both Wilhelm Wundt and Edward Titchener contended that introspection provides no convincing evidence that thought can be manifested in consciousness by itself—that is, independent of modality-specific imagery. Similarly, the notion that concepts have intrinsic qualia has been vigorously attacked by such famous philosophers as J.J. Smart, Gilbert Ryle, and Hilary Putnam. Moving closer to the present, during the past few decades many theorists have continued to challenge the notion of cognitive phenomenology, as illustrated by the following passages, mostly drawn from Bayne and Montague (2012b):Should we include any mental states that are not feelings and experiences on the list of phenomenally conscious states? Consider my desire to eat ice cream. Is there not something it is like for me to have this desire? If so, is this state not phenomenally conscious? And what about the belief that I am a very fine fellow? Or the memory that September 2 is the date on which I first fell in love? …. It seems to me not implausible to deal with these cases by arguing that insofar as there is any phenomenal or immediately experienced felt quality to the above states, this is due to their being accompanied by sensations or images or feelings that are the real bearers of the phenomenal character. (Tye, 1995, p. 4)As best we can tell, believing that 17 is a prime number does not feel any different from believing that 19 is a prime number. Indeed, as best we can tell, neither of these states has any distinctive qualitative properties. Neither of them feels like much at all. (Nichols and Stich, 2003, p. 196)Bodily sensations and perceptual experiences are prime examples of states for which there is something it is like to be in them. They have a phenomenal feel, a phenomenology, or, in a term sometimes used in psychology, raw feels. Cognitive states are prime examples of states for which there is not something it is like to be in them, of states that lack a phenomenology. (Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson, 2007, p. 129, original emphasis)I will argue … that the felt qualities of our thoughts can be completely accommodated by appeal to concomitant sensory imagery. (Prinz, 2012, p. 149)An iconoclastic way of putting this would be to say that there really are no such things as conscious thoughts ….(Jackendoff, 2012, p. 84)

The conservative view is elaborated and defended more fully in the following additional references: Levine (1983), Jackendoff (1987),Lormand (1996), Clark (2000), Langsam (2000), Wilson (2003), Carruthers (2005), Robinson (2012), Damasio (2010), O'Callaghan (2011), Carruthers and Veillet (2012), and Tye and Wright (2012).


Aims

The overarching goal of this article is to show that the controversy over whether we are ever aware of concepts is quite relevant to research on the neural substrates of consciousness. Here at the outset, I must acknowledge that space limitations prevent me from presenting a thorough, well-balanced summary of the debate, let alone attempting to resolve it. I do, however, believe that the conservative view has more empirical support than the liberal view, and for this reason I will concentrate on describing some ways in which the former approach has serious implications for several contemporary neuroscientific theories of consciousness. Two of the most prominent theories—namely, the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT) (Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene, 2014; Dehaene et al., 2014) and the Integrated Information Theory (Tononi, 2004, 2012a, 2012b; Oizumi et al., 2014; Tononi and Koch, 2015)—clearly adopt the liberal view, but they do so without overt justification and without discussing the alternative position. Therefore, in the first two sections I take up each theory in turn, highlight a number of the chief proponents' assumptions and assertions that reflect the liberal view, and raise counter-arguments from the perspective of the conservative view. Then in the next section I summarize another theory—namely, the Attended Intermediate-Level Representation Theory (Prinz, 2012)—and contend that it warrants greater consideration because it not only endorses the conservative view but has several other strengths as well. I also point out, however, that it has independent shortcomings that prevent it from achieving adequate explanatory coherence. Finally, I conclude by emphasizing the need for researchers in the neuroscience of consciousness to realize that the question of whether concepts ever reach awareness is a significant one with major consequences for both theoretical frameworks and experimental investigations.


The Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT)


Summary of the GNWT

Building on a previous proposal by Baars (1988), the GNWT developed by Dehaene and colleagues holds that consciousness arises from a capacity-limited architecture that is adaptively designed to extract relevant information from a variety of mental systems and make it broadly available for purposes such as linguistic encoding, memory storage, planning, and decision-making (Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene, 2014; Dehaene et al., 2014). During perception, a massive amount of information is processed unconsciously by specialized mechanisms that operate in parallel. Some of that information, however, is selected as being especially pertinent to the individual's present goals, and it then crosses the threshold of conscious access and enters the global workspace for flexible sharing. According to Dehaene (p. 168), “this global availability of information is precisely what we subjectively experience as a conscious state.”

Based on many experiments involving minimal contrasts between conscious and unconscious conditions, the GNWT maintains that conscious access has four neuronal signatures. First, starting roughly 300 ms after stimulus onset, there is a sudden ignition of activity that includes not only the regions that represent the specific content (e.g., color, shape, motion, etc.) of the given conscious state, but also the regions that comprise the backbone of the global workspace—namely, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, the inferior parietal cortex, and the precuneus, all of which form a so-called “rich club” network of tightly interconnected hubs (van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011; van den Heuvel et al., 2012). Second, this widely distributed ignition is accompanied by a P300 event-related potential (ERP) component. Third, in conjunction with the P300 wave, there is a significant increase in high-frequency gamma-band (> 30 Hz) oscillations in the ignited regions. Finally, during the same time window, and with the help of thalamocortical loops, these regions become functionally integrated as a transiently stable coalition or “brain web” through synchronized reciprocal signals carried by long-distance excitatory axons.


Critique of the GNWT

Although the GNWT has many virtues, its putative signatures of consciousness are inconsistent with several empirical findings. For instance, although the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is necessary for monitoring and maintaining perceptual information, it does not appear to be essential for consciously experiencing that information (Penfield and Evans, 1935; Mataró et al., 2001; Rounis et al., 2010; Frässle et al., 2014). In addition, there is evidence that the P300 wave and enhanced gamma oscillations reflect separate task-related post-perceptual processes, rather than the process of becoming aware of stimuli (Pitts et al., 2014a, 2014b).

Here, however, I focus on a different aspect of the GNWT—specifically, that it assumes, in line with the liberal view, that consciousness is not restricted to sensory, motor, and affective representations, but encompasses concepts as well. To be sure, Dehaene not only acknowledges, but has played a major role in demonstrating, that concepts such as those denoted by numerals, words, and phrases can be processed outside of awareness (Dehaene et al., 1998, Naccache and Dehaene, 2001; Kouider and Dehaene, 2007; Van Gaal et al., 2014). But it is also quite clear from his recent book, Consciousness and the Brain (Dehaene, 2014), that he believes that concepts, and the thoughts they enter into, are perfectly viable candidates for participating in the global workspace of experience, and that they actually serve important cognitive functions within that workspace. Indeed, the subtitle of his book is Deciphering How the Brain Codes Our Thoughts, and the expression “conscious thought” occurs at least half a dozen times throughout its pages (pp. 20, 53, 110, 146, 175, 251), including in the title of Chapter 4, “The signatures of a conscious thought.” In what follows, I consider five parts of the book where this notion of conscious thought is discussed, and in each case I argue that it is inconsistent with evidence which supports the opposite conservative view that thoughts are always hidden from awareness.

To begin, Dehaene (pp. 145–48) summarizes several intracranial recording studies that have revealed single neurons in the human anterior temporal lobes (ATLs) that respond fairly selectively to pictures of particular entities, including famous people like Bill Clinton and Jennifer Aniston, as well as famous locations like the Sydney Opera House and the World Trade Center (Kreiman et al., 2000, Quiroga et al., 2005, 2008a, 2008b). When a patient sees different pictures of the same person or place—for example, assorted photographs, portraits, and line drawings of Bill Clinton—the firing rate of the relevant cell reliably tracks the invariant identity of that object, regardless of radical shifts in the fine-grained features of the images. Moreover, the cell's firing rate also follows the patient's reports of the visibility of the stimuli. In commenting on these remarkable findings, Dehaene states that what the discharge patterns index “is neither a global arousal signal nor myriad changing details, but the gist of the current picture—just the right sort of stable representation that we would expect to encode our conscious thoughts.” In the same vein, he also states that when we observe such patterns, “we are witnessing the contents of consciousness.”

These ATL cells do appear to contribute substantially to our conceptual knowledge of well-known people and places; indeed, that is why Quiroga (2012) calls them “concept cells.” But the mere fact that their activation correlates with conscious experiences of these entities does not imply that their representational contents are an inherent part of such experiences (Aru et al., 2012b). On the contrary, two important points suggest that, in keeping with the conservative view, the concepts captured by these cells never reach awareness.

The first point involves the contrast between the remarkable specificity of experiences and the equally remarkable generality of concepts. Perhaps the most salient property of conscious states is their extraordinary degree of differentiation. Even if we restrict our attention to the visual domain, it is obvious that the number of potentially separate experiences is exceedingly large, limited only by one's imagination. The primary function of concepts, however, is to abstract away from all of this diversity so that certain aspects of experiences can be regarded as instances of more wide-ranging, similarity-based categories. In fact, according to the conservative view, it is precisely because concepts always transcend the experiences they apply to that they always remain unconscious. Both Prinz (2012) and Jackendoff (2012) underscore this point:When I look at a chair, try as I may, I only see a specific chair oriented in a particular way. … it's not clear what it would mean to say that one visually experiences chairness. What kind of experience would that be? A chair seen from no vantage point? A chair from multiple vantage points overlapping? A shape possessed by all chairs? Phenomenologically, these options seem extremely implausible. (Prinz, 2012, p. 74)Now the interesting thing is that everything you perceive is a particular individual (a token)—you can't perceive categories (types). And you can only imagine particular individuals—you can't imagine categories. If you try to imagine a type, say forks in general, your image is still a particular fork, a particular token. (Jackendoff, 2012, p. 130)In the current context, what matters most is that this line of argumentation is not restricted to concepts for types of entities, like chairs and forks, but also applies to concepts for one-of-a-kind entities, like the well-known people and places that are represented by the sorts of ATL cells described above. Even though unique entities like these are significant enough to warrant dedicated concepts, they may still be consciously experienced in a vast if not infinite number of ways. For instance, non-living things such as eminent landmarks can be seen under different lighting conditions, at different distances, from different angles, etc., and living things such as famous people can vary in their appearance even more, due to changes associated with facial expression, posture, hairstyle, age, etc. But, while the specific ways that certain unique entities look to us may radically shift across different situations, the concepts that enable us to identify them remain relatively invariant. Moreover, and most critically, the activation of these concepts during the recognition process does not seem to add anything distinctively cognitive to the experience. For example, to reformulate Prinz's (p. 74) statement, it is not clear what it would mean to experience “Bill Clinton-ness” or “Jennifer Aniston-ness” in some sort of purely conceptual sense that goes beyond perceptual images. These observations support the hypothesis that, contrary to Dehaene's (pp. 145–48) proposal, the concepts encoded by ATL cells never achieve consciousness; instead, they always perform their work beneath the surface of awareness.

The second point involves a set of neuropsychological studies that provide further evidence for this position. In particular, it has been repeatedly shown that dysfunction of the ATLs due to stroke, surgical resection, gradual deterioration, or congenital disease impairs the ability to recognize famous people like Bill Clinton and Jennifer Aniston, but does not impair the ability to consciously see their faces (A.R. Damasio et al., 1990; H. Damasio et al., 2004; Snowden et al., 2004; Avidan et al., 2014). This dissociation greatly strengthens the argument that whenever we see a familiar person, the relevant concept cells in the ATLs play an essential role in allowing us to identify them, but do not contribute directly to our conscious experience. Instead, the experience itself appears to be subserved by large assemblies of cells in the intermediate regions of the ventral face processing network—that is, the occipital face area and the fusiform face area—that represent the detailed visual features of faces (Tsao et al., 2008; Axelrod and Yovel, 2013; Von Der Heide et al., 2013; Rangarajan et al., 2014).

Now, a critic, especially one who espouses the liberal view, might say that because perception is not driven entirely by bottom-up input, but is instead modulated by predictions and other kinds of prior representational states (Kosslyn, 1994; Friston, 2005; Clark, 2013; Panichello et al., 2013), it is certainly possible that in some situations one's concept of how a familiar person typically looks does in fact influence one's conscious experience of seeing them, if only in subtle ways. If that were the case, however, it would not imply that one is actually aware of the concept itself; rather, it would only imply that one is aware of the top-down effects of that concept (for relevant findings, see Hansen et al., 2006; Meteyard et al., 2007; Gendron et al., 2012; Lupyan and Ward, 2013).

Returning to Dehaene's (pp. 99–100) book, he elaborates the GNWT by comparing consciousness to the spokesperson of a large institution who voices the “common wisdom” extracted from different departments of a complex staff composed of thousands of specialist employees. While developing this analogy, he states that “like a presidential brief, the brain's conscious summary must contain an interpretation of the environment written in a ‘language of thought' that is abstract enough to interface with the mechanisms of intention and decision making.” How, though, could any level of representation that is abstract enough to bridge the gap between perception and behavior have any intrinsic qualia of its own, over and above the types of modality-specific qualia that are associated with the sensory and motor representations that must be connected with each other? Dehaene does not attempt to answer this question, nor does he acknowledge that it is a genuine issue. He simply adopts the liberal view that the concepts comprising the “language of thought” can reach awareness when activated, without either justifying that perspective or discussing the opposite conservative view that concepts always operate unconsciously.

Later in the same chapter, Dehaene (p. 110) expands on the notion that consciousness is like a summary of relevant information by stating that it includes “a multisensory, viewer-invariant, and durable synthesis of the environment.” But neither visual awareness nor any other form of experience contains viewer-invariant representations; on the contrary, possessing a first-person perspective—one that, for sighted people, is typically anchored behind the eyes—is often taken to be a fundamental requirement of bodily self-consciousness (Blanke and Metzinger, 2009). This is quite pertinent to the main topic of this article because, according to the conservative view, one of the reasons why concepts cannot reach awareness is because they always generalize over particular perspectives. This key insight is nicely captured by Prinz (p. 74) in the passage quoted earlier, where he makes what is essentially the following argument: the concept of a chair is viewer-invariant, which is to say that it covers all possible vantage points; however, it is impossible to see or imagine a chair “from no vantage point” or “from multiple vantage points overlapping”; therefore, it is impossible to directly experience the concept of a chair, that is, “chairness” in the most general sense.

In another part of his book, Dehaene (pp. 177–78) uses the example of Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa to illustrate his idea that a conscious state is underpinned by millions of widely distributed neurons that represent different facets of the experience and that are functionally integrated through bidirectional, rapidly reverberating signals. Most importantly for present purposes, he claims that when we look at the classic painting, our global workspace of awareness includes not just its visual properties (e.g., the hands, eyes, and “Cheshire cat smile”), but also “fragments of meaning,” “a connection to our memories of Leonardo's genius,” and “a single coherent interpretation,” which he characterizes as “a seductive Italian woman.” This part of the book clearly reveals Dehaene's endorsement of the liberal view that concepts are among the kinds of information that can reach consciousness. The problem, however, is that he does not explicitly defend this position against the opposite conservative view, which denies that we can directly experience complex semantic structures like the one expressed by the phrase “a seductive Italian woman.” The meaning of the word seductive, for instance, is highly abstract, since it applies not only to the nature of Mona Lisa's smile, but also to countless other visual and non-visual stimuli that satisfy the conceptual criteria of, to quote from Webster's dictionary, “having tempting qualities.” On the one hand, it is reasonable to suppose that there is something it is inimitably like, phenomenologically speaking, to perceive particular instances of seductive stimuli, such as Mona Lisa's smile. But on the other hand, it is extremely hard to imagine how anyone could directly experience seductiveness in some sort of general, all-encompassing sense. Hence, the conservative view maintains that this concept, like all others, lacks intrinsic qualia.

Near the end of his book, Dehaene (p. 251) proposes that “the human global neuronal workspace may be unique in its capacity to formulate conscious thoughts such as ‘taller than Tom,' ‘left of the red door,' or ‘not given to John.'” Once again, though, advocates of the conservative view could argue that while the phonological forms of these phrases can certainly reach awareness, their compositional meanings are far too abstract to do so. For example, the expression taller than Tom encodes a comparative scalar relationship that could apply to an infinite number of entities whose extent along the dimension of height exceeds that of Tom but is otherwise unbounded (Bierwisch and Lang, 1989). One could generate a vast array of conscious mental images that depict this relationship in various ways, but none of them would be able to indicate, in a purely visual, non-symbolic fashion, that what's really important is the relative height of the two objects. Turning to the expression left of the red door, it refers to a region of space that is determined in two steps: first, the left and right sides of the door are identified as the ones that correspond, in a mirror-reflecting manner, to the left and right sides of the viewer facing the door; and second, the target domain is specified by projecting out a moderate distance in the leftward direction defined by the horizontal left/right axis imposed on the door (Levinson, 2003). As with the expression taller than Tom, it would be impossible for any particular image to indicate in a non-symbolic fashion exactly how this spatial relationship is determined. It also bears mentioning that any conscious representation of the details of the situation described by the phrase left of the red door would need to portray the door as having a precise shape and a precise shade of red, thereby making the image in awareness much more specific than the actual content of the linguistically encoded concepts. Finally, the expression not given to John refers to an unrealized event, and for this reason it is quite difficult, to say the least, to understand how such a semantic structure could ever be directly experienced. What could it possibly be like to consciously represent the concept of negation in a way that fully complies with its extraordinary degree of abstractness (Horn, 1989)?

Before concluding this discussion of the GNWT, it is worthwhile to briefly invoke Block's (1995) distinction between phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness and ask whether Dehaene (2014) might regard concepts, and the thoughts they enter into, as being available to awareness in the latter sense rather than the former. In the last chapter of his book, Dehaene (p. 261) does mention some of Block's work, but unfortunately he does not address the distinction that Block proposed, so it is difficult to know where he stands on this issue. Nevertheless, some evidence that he might regard activated concepts as being potentially conscious in the access sense rather than the phenomenal sense comes from the fact that he frequently uses the expression “conscious access” not only in his book but also in other presentations of his theory (Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene et al., 2014).

It is important to note, however, that Block's (1995) distinction is by no means uncontroversial, and some proponents of the conservative view reject it. Prinz (p. 6) is one such scholar, as revealed by his remark that “information access seems conscious … when and only when it is accompanied by phenomenal experience.” With respect to concepts, their retrieval is often accompanied by inner speech, visual images, and other forms of phenomenal experience, but the activated concepts themselves do not appear to have any uniquely cognitive qualia of their own, and this suggests that access consciousness may not exist as a special kind of awareness that is separate from phenomenal consciousness.

Consider, for example, the tip-of-the-tongue state, which occurs when you have accessed a particular concept—say, the one encoded by the word pterodactyl—but cannot recall its name. While searching your memory for this elusive word, you might conjure up various kinds of verbal and nonverbal imagery, like saying to yourself “It's a large flying dinosaur” and visualizing the appearance of the fearsome creature. But, as indicated above, these forms of modality-specific imagery do not actually constitute the concept, since the concept itself resides at a higher level of generalization. The key question, then, is this: apart from such imagery, and from the frustrating sense of persistently groping for the desired word, what is left in your conscious awareness? According to the conservative view, nothing. Even though the meaning of the word continues to be activated, it does not have any inherent qualia of its own.

A similar situation involves the realization that what one has just said does not accurately express what one was trying to say. Besides showing that thought is independent of language, such events provide additional evidence for the conservative view, as Jackendoff (pp. 90–91) explains:… we can only be aware of the content of our thoughts if they're linked with pronunciation. So if we haven't yet turned a thought into words, we're only aware at best of thinking going on, not of exactly what the thought is. If we then utter a sentence, we can unconsciously compare the thought it expresses with the thought we intended to express, and we can get the feeling that the utterance is inadequate.

To summarize, the GNWT adopts the liberal view that activated concepts not only can but often do reach awareness. Hence it is at odds with numerous empirical findings and theoretical arguments that favor the competing conservative view that concepts never reach awareness. This is arguably a significant limitation of the theory. Perhaps the most serious consequence is that the theory's characterization of the neuronal signatures of consciousness may turn out to be too broad. This is because over the course of their research on these signatures, Dehaene and his colleagues have not taken care to distinguish between, on the one hand, the sorts of sensory, motor, and affective representations that can occur in conscious experiences, and on the other hand, the sorts of high-level conceptual representations that—again, according to the conservative view—cannot.

Suppose, for example, that one suddenly saw a bicycle. According to the GNWT, the shapes, sizes, colors, and spatial arrangements of the object's parts would enter one's awareness after roughly 300 ms, and the resulting conscious state would be subserved by the synchronization of enhanced gamma oscillations in many populations of neurons distributed across not only certain visual areas of the brain, but also other areas involved in processes such as attention, short-term memory, and the widespread broadcasting of information. Now, assuming that one is familiar with bicycles, one's concept of a bicycle would also be activated—specifically, in a well-studied tool-related network consisting of certain temporal, parietal, and frontal areas (Garcea and Mahon, 2014; Stevens et al., 2015)—and the activation of that concept would allow one to rapidly recognize the object and draw inferences about it (Grill-Spector and Kanwisher, 2005). This process of concept retrieval, however, would, according to the conservative view, take place unconsciously. So we are left with the following question: How exactly would the neural correlates of the conscious perception of the bicycle differ from the neural correlates of the unconscious recognition of the bicycle? This issue has yet to be rigorously investigated, but it must ultimately be resolved if genuine progress is to be made in the neuroscience of consciousness—once more, assuming the conservative view is actually correct.


The Integrated Information Theory (IIT)


Summary of the IIT

Originating from a previous proposal called the Dynamic Core Hypothesis (Tononi and Edelman, 1988; Edelman and Tononi, 2000), the IIT has been developed primarily by Tononi as a mathematical approach to measuring both the quantity and the quality of consciousness not only in biological organisms such as ourselves, but also, at least in principle, in artificial devices such as robots (Tononi, 2004, 2012a, 2012b; Oizumi et al., 2014; Tononi and Koch, 2015). The IIT highlights the fact that a conscious state is simultaneously differentiated (i.e., every experience is unique insofar as it rules out a tremendous number of alternative possibilities) and integrated (i.e., every experience comprises a unified “scene” perceived from a particular perspective). It therefore predicts that variable degrees of awareness will be associated with variable degrees of differentiation and integration in the human thalamocortical system. Although this idea requires further refinement, it has been supported by studies involving not only healthy adults at different stages of the sleep–wake cycle (Massimini et al., 2005), but also brain-damaged patients in either vegetative or minimally conscious states (Casali et al., 2013). These studies employed complex analyses of neural activity that were indirectly based on the central construct of the IIT, namely a formula referred to as “phi” (Φ), which is postulated to be a marker of consciousness, since it measures the amount of differentiated and integrated information in a system composed of multiple parts.

Concepts are major ingredients of the IIT, but they are defined in a technical manner as discrete mechanisms that are anatomically implemented by (sets of) neurons and that functionally specify irreducible cause–effect repertoires, where in each case the cause is the set of past inputs that give rise to the present on/off state of the mechanism, and the effect is the set of future consequences that follow from the present on/off state of the mechanism. Tononi maintains that such mechanisms are organized as nested hierarchies throughout the cerebral cortex, from the very lowest levels of representation to the very highest. In his scientific papers, most of the examples of this part of the framework are rather dense, but in his recent book, Phi: A Voyage from the Brain to the Soul (Tononi, 2012b), he presents a literary version of his theory, and in Chapter 19, he includes a fairly clear discussion of what he means by concepts. For instance, he writes that “we may discover a mechanism for detecting light in the center, another one for light on the left side, one for blue and one for red, one for oval and one for square shapes; one for noses, one for lips, and one for faces, and maybe even one for her, whoever she might be” (Tononi, 2012b, p. 201). All of these mechanisms are assumed to be separate concepts implemented by (sets of) neurons at different levels of the visual hierarchy, from V1 all the way up to the ATLs. Interestingly, Tononi argues that no single neuron, and hence no single concept, has any meaning independent of the various networks of mechanisms in which it is embedded, because the representational content of each one can only be identified by its relationship with, and especially its differentiation from, the others. He also argues, however, that whenever a multitude of concepts are coactivated in such a way that they collectively yield an irreducible cause–effect repertoire, the entire assembly constitutes a multifaceted “conceptual structure.” And this in turn leads to what is, for present purposes, the most important aspect of the theory—specifically, its strong endorsement of the liberal view that concepts are conscious when activated.

This key assumption is explicitly formalized in the IIT as the “central identity” thesis, which asserts that “an experience is a maximally integrated conceptual (information) structure or quale—that is, a maximally irreducible constellation of points in qualia space” (Tononi, 2012a, p. 306). Indeed, according to the framework, at any given time whatever conceptual structure happens to be activated in an intricate information processing system such as a human brain “completely specifies ‘what it is like to be' that particular mechanism in that particular state” (Tononi, 2012a, p. 306). Tononi and Koch (2015) elaborate this crucial claim by imagining a situation in which one watches a movie starring Jennifer Aniston (JA), and it is clear from their discussion that they believe one's experience would consist of a rapidly shifting series of fantastically complicated conceptual structures implemented by enormous neural networks distributed across the thalamocortical system. Some of the elements of these putative conceptual structures would change their on/off status quite frequently, like those subserved by the low-level cells in V1 that specify the orientations of edges in certain parts of the visual field. Other elements, however, would remain engaged for several seconds or even several minutes, like “the invariant concept ‘JA's face',” which is presumably subserved by high-level cells in the ATLs (Tononi and Koch, 2015, p. 9). In short, the IIT equates consciousness with concepts, regardless of their degree of complexity.


Critique of the IIT

Although this approach has many merits, it also has some serious weaknesses. In the current context, the most salient problem is that the IIT is incompatible with data supporting the conservative view that we are never aware of concepts. For instance, as argued above in connection with Dehaene's GNWT, even though one's concept of a famous person like Jennifer Aniston is activated whenever one sees, hears, or thinks about her, this does not entail that the concept itself is part of those experiences (Aru et al., 2012b). On the contrary, one's conscious perception of this particular actress in TV shows, movies, magazines, etc., would probably not be significantly different (apart from changes in the associated verbal and nonverbal imagery, and perhaps the lack of subtle top-down effects) if one did not even recognize her due to having never learned her name and background or to having lost that knowledge as the result of ATL damage (A.R. Damasio et al., 1990; H. Damasio et al., 2004; Snowden et al., 2004; Avidan et al., 2014). This is because at any given moment one's awareness of Jennifer Aniston (or of anyone else, for that matter) is shaped not so much by one's degree of familiarity with that unique individual, but rather by such idiosyncratic and transient factors as whether one sees them from the front, the left, the right, half hidden behind a chair or table, sitting, standing, yawning, stretching, in candlelight, under a street lamp, through a fog, and so on (Millikan, 2014). According to the conservative view, the contents of consciousness consist of modality-specific details like these, not the high-level concepts that generalize over them.

A similar line of criticism also applies to Tononi's treatment of concepts of non-unique entities. For example, in Chapter 19 of Phi, one of the characters talks about how the machinery of conceptual representation could create “the idea of a triangle, wherever it may be, no matter how large or small, no matter where its corners are pointing, no matter whether equilateral, isosceles, or scalene” (Tononi, 2012b, p. 200). Even a concept as abstract as this would, according to the IIT, be conscious when activated. But how could the notion of a triangle possibly have any distinctive qualia? How could it ever be directly experienced? After all, no image could capture the conceptually vital fact that, as Tononi's character observes, a triangle must have three sides but need not have any particular size or shape. Similarly, Jackendoff (p. 52) points out that nothing in a particular image of a triangle tells us that “having three sides is what's important for trianglehood.” And he goes on to note that “once you state that as the critical feature, you've gone outside of what visual images can do.”

In closing, the main message is that Tononi's IIT has the same significant limitation as Dehaene's GNWT. It assumes—incorrectly, according to the conservative view—that concepts can reach awareness when activated, and as a consequence its account of the neural underpinnings of consciousness appears to be too inclusive.


The Attended Intermediate-Level Representation Theory (AIRT)

Expanding on earlier work by Jackendoff (1987), the AIRT developed by Prinz (2012) stands in sharp contrast to both the GNWT and the IIT because it adopts at the very outset the conservative view that we are never aware of concepts. In fact, based on the strength of the evidence for this view, Prinz (p. 32) maintains that “an adequate theory should restrict consciousness to processes that lie outside of those systems that underwrite our highest cognitive capacities.” Because the AIRT is among the few contemporary frameworks, if not the only one, that achieves this goal, its three major tenets are worth summarizing and evaluating here.

First, a central claim is that perceptual awareness arises at intermediate rather than low or high levels of sensory hierarchies. In the visual domain, for example, what we experience is a world of vividly colored objects with clear contours, located at different distances from us and framed by our own point of view. Such conscious states do not correspond to the “flat, disunified jumble” (Prinz, 2012, p. 51) that is encoded in V1, nor do they correspond to the abstract, viewer-invariant concepts that are encoded in high-level regions of the temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes. Rather, they correspond to the kinds of attribute-specific representations that are constructed by specialized cortical areas at more intermediate stages of the visual system. Exactly which areas are part of this privileged family is not yet clear, but Prinz suggests that likely candidates include V2, V3, V3A, V4, V5, V6, and V7, since they have been linked with the awareness of form, color, motion, depth, and perspective.

Second, the AIRT maintains that intermediate-level representations only become conscious when they are modulated by attention and thereby made available to working memory. Although the precise relationship between consciousness and attention has been, and continues to be, quite controversial, Prinz marshalls a substantial amount of psychological and neurobiological evidence to support his hypothesis. He also emphasizes that while conscious information must always be accessible to working memory, it need not always be accessed to working memory—as, for instance, when one only glimpses a tiny flash of light for a few milliseconds and does not subsequently reflect on that experience. This is an important point because it distinguishes the AIRT from the GNWT. As indicated above, the GNWT assumes that in order for information to reach awareness, it must be brought into the global workspace—that is, into the large-scale storage and broadcasting system that includes resources for working memory in the lateral prefrontal cortex. The AIRT rejects this requirement, however, and it is therefore more compatible than the GNWT with data suggesting that consciousness can occur without prefrontal involvement (e.g., see Kouider et al., 2007, and the comments on that study by Prinz, 2012, p. 31; see also Penfield and Evans, 1935; Rounis et al., 2010; Mataró et al., 2001; Frässle et al., 2014).

Third, the AIRT states that consciousness is neurophysiologically realized as what Prinz (2012) calls gamma vector waves. According to this conjecture, attending to an object causes the distributed intermediate-level neural populations that encode the various features of that object to become synchronized via enhanced and phased-locked oscillations in the gamma band—a phenomenon referred to as a gamma vector wave. In addition, cells for qualitatively different features, such as shape and color, are proposed to have separate spiking patterns that become coordinated at the coarser time scale of gamma. “By analogy,” writes Prinz (p. 141), “imagine playing two melodies on two different radios while raising and lowering their volume in sync. Each melody would remain intact, but they would now also be heard as parts of the same overarching sound pattern.” This intriguing idea is bolstered by a large body of data, but like the GNWT and the IIT, it has several shortcomings. Most critically, during the conscious observation of recognizable objects, gamma responses are manifested in ways that violate the theory's predictions. For instance, in the mid-level areas that putatively subserve visual awareness, gamma responses do not reliably correlate with subjective reports (Aru et al., 2012a). Moreover, as noted above in the discussion of the GNWT, gamma responses increase greatly not only in mid-level areas but also in many high-level areas, some of which contribute to conceptual knowledge and hence should not display any neurophysiological signatures of consciousness (Fisch et al., 2009; Gaillard et al., 2009). Thus, it remains mysterious how the brain regions that underlie our conscious perception of the visual world are operationally distinguished from those that underlie our unconscious understanding of that world.

In sum, because the AIRT adopts the conservative view that concepts never reach awareness, it may have a significant advantage over both the GNWT and the IIT. In addition, it synthesizes in a coherent manner a great deal of empirical and theoretical work in philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience. It is not without limitations, however. Most notably, although the gamma vector wave proposal has several virtues, it—like all other attempts to pinpoint the neurophysiological signatures of consciousness—cannot explain all of the available data.


Conclusion

To elucidate the neural substrates of consciousness, it is first necessary to determine which mental representations in the flow of information processing do and do not reach awareness. The results of such an analysis can then be used to constrain the psychological phenomena for which unique neural correlates are sought.

According to the liberal view, the contents of experience include not only sensory, motor, and affective states, but also concepts and the thoughts they enter into. This view matches many people's intuitions. For instance, we spend much of our lives producing and comprehending language (both overtly and as inner speech), and it often seems as if these experiences are the equivalent of thinking. In addition, we are accustomed to recognizing objects and events quite rapidly and effortlessly, so it seems natural to suppose that we are directly aware of their meanings. But even though these considerations give some intuitive appeal to the liberal view, I have argued that a variety of other factors strongly favor the opposite conservative view, which maintains that concepts lack intrinsic qualia and always perform their functions beneath the surface of awareness. According to this alternative position, when we process spoken language, the only representations that reach awareness are the pronunciations of words, and they serve as conscious “handles” for the concepts that remain unconscious; likewise, when we recognize objects and events, the only representations that reach awareness are the superficial appearances of stimuli, and, again, they serve as conscious “handles” for the concepts that remain unconscious (Jackendoff, 2012).

If, as I suspect, the conservative view is correct, it will be necessary for future research on the neuroscience of consciousness to distinguish between two levels of representation that are often engaged simultaneously in the brain: First, the kinds of sensory, motor, and affective representations that do reach awareness; and second, the kinds of conceptual representations that do not. I have shown that two of the most prominent and influential theories—namely, Dehaene's GNWT and Tononi’s IIT—fail to draw this distinction because they assume the liberal view. And although a different framework—namely, Prinz's AIRT—does attempt to make the contrast, it unfortunately cannot account for all the available data.

As this field of inquiry continues to advance, it will be essential for investigators to think more deeply about the critical question of whether we are ever aware of concepts. After all, even though I am admittedly biased toward the conservative view, I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge, once again in closing, that the debate between this view and the competing liberal view is by no means over. Indeed, the relevant literature contains far more issues and arguments than I have covered here. My hope is that more neuroscientists will begin to take a greater interest in this literature, and that their experimental and theoretical work will benefit from having done so.


Serial versus parallel processing in mid-level vision: filling-in the details of spatial interpolation

Michele A. Cox, Alexander Maier — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC6089088, CC BY 4.0.

The relationship between boundary completion and surface filling-in, two core mechanisms of mid-level vision, remains unclear. Here, we integrate recent empirical findings to shine new light onto the neural mechanisms of boundary completion and surface filling-in as well as their relation to each other. Specifically, we discuss several psychophysical and neurophysiological studies that, when taken together, support a model where object boundaries and visual surfaces are interpolated in parallel, with one process impacting the other. We suggest that visual boundary completion and surface filling-in are two interacting processes that are supported by neural processes that are distributed throughout several areas of the early visual system.


Serial and parallel processing for object vision

Visual perception is thought to arise from a series of hierarchically organized processing steps that extract increasingly complex visual features from raw sensory input (Felleman and Van Essen, 1991). This idea of increased convergence across a linear sequence of discrete visual processing steps is consistent with both the pattern of anatomical connections between visual brain areas (bottom) as well as the longer onset times of responses to visual stimuli and the increasingly complex response preferences of neurons at later stages of processing (top). However, this hierarchical scheme of visual processing also contains elements of parallel processing that are mediated via feedback connections that modulate neuronal responses at earlier stages of processing (Bullier and Nowak, 1995; Hochstein and Ahissar, 2002; Lamme, Supèr and Spekreijse, 1998; Lee et al., 1998; Zeki and Shipp, 1988).

At the main entry point of retinal information, the primary visual cortex (V1), neurons are highly selective for steep local luminance gradients, which aid the visual system in detecting the location and orientation of high contrast luminance edges within the two-dimensional (2D) retinal image (Hubel and Wiesel, 1977). However, without any additional processing steps, edge detection as a means to infer object boundaries falls prey to occlusion, low frequency luminance gradients, and other local and global image properties that prevent a clear distinction of pronounced visual objects (a–c).


Boundary completion—a prerequisite for surface perception?

One way the visual system seems to overcome the inherent limits of edge detection is to perceptually complete object boundaries even if some edges are physically absent (Tversky, Geisler and Perry, 2004; Wertheimer, 1923). This phenomenon, known as “boundary completion,” is a form of perceptual interpolation whereby disjointed line elements are linearly interpolated in early visual cortex to form a cohesive contour (d–e; Field, Hayes and Hess, 1993).

An intuitive notion that follows from the above is that the early visual system performs a series of computational steps to extract increasingly complex visual features from retinal input. First, linear edges are extracted from the raw retinal input. Following this step, individual edges are spatially interpolated into outlines that delineate 2D image elements from each other and the background. Once these borders have been completed, each location within the visual field can be assigned to be within or outside of contour-defined shapes, and each enclosed shape is assigned respective surface attributes (filling-in).

Supporting this serial model, several psychophysical studies have demonstrated that image boundaries profoundly influence the perception of visual surfaces. In particular, a number of visual illusions suggest that a boundary’s contrast and color spreads rapidly across visual space to “fill in” the intervening surface (de Weerd, Desimone and Ungerleider, 1998; Paradiso and Nakayama, 1991; Pinna, Brelstaff and Spillmann, 2001). This interplay between boundary completion and surface filling-in can be readily observed in the Craik–Cornsweet–O'Brien effect (Cornsweet, 1970; Craik, 1966; O'Brien, 1959), illusory shapes (Kanizsa, 1976), neon color spreading (Van Tuijl, 1975), and afterimages (Shimojo, Kamitani and Nishida, 2001).

A recently described visual illusion demonstrates the causal influence of visual boundaries over perceptual surface filling more directly. In contour adaptation (CA), prolonged inspection of a contrast-inversing outline suppresses the perceptual visibility of a monochrome version of the encompassed surface if presented subsequently at the same location of visual space (Anstis, 2013). Critically, under these circumstances, only the neuronal populations representing the edge of the shape, not the shape’s surface, are fatigued by adaptation. Nevertheless, CA renders the entire shape perceptually invisible for up to several seconds, as if no visual surface was presented (Cox et al., 2014).

A second recently described visual illusion that strikingly demonstrates the deterministic effect of boundaries on surface filling-in employs perceptual afterimages. Typically, when a colored shape is viewed for a prolonged period of time and then removed, a shape with complementary color (i.e., an afterimage) is briefly perceived at the same location in visual space. However, the perceptual outcome of such afterimages can be profoundly altered by imposing a divergent contour (van Lier, Vergeer and Anstis, 2009). More specifically, adaptation on the same two-tone image can produce multiple, differently colored afterimages depending on the shape of the contour presented right after the colored stimulus. Both this afterimage illusion and CA seem to be parsimoniously explained by the assumption of visual surface filling-in following, and indeed being determined by, surrounding boundaries.

Several neurophysiological studies suggest a similar rank order of boundary representations and surface perception. Voltage sensitive dye imaging (VSD) in monkey V1, for example, revealed that population responses initially correspond to individual stimulus elements (Gilad, Meirovithz and Slovin, 2013). Once this initial response has tapered, population responses remain enhanced for contour elements but are depressed for background elements of the image. In the same vein, intracranial recordings of laminar responses in monkey V1 (Self et al., 2013) demonstrated three distinct phases of activity. The initial volley of activity in the feedforward input layers of V1 occurs regardless of a figure’s precise location relative to the neuronal receptive fields under study. Following this transient indiscriminant response, recording sites with receptive fields that are spatially coincident with the figure boundary exhibit elevated activity in the feedback- recipient upper layers of V1. A third phase of activity restricted to the upper and lower layers of V1 is only observed when the receptive fields are coincident with the surface of the figure.

One interpretation of these findings is that neuronal processes related to visual boundary completion precede the computations underlying surface filling-in. This interpretation would be consistent with the causal effects of visual boundaries on surface perception discussed above. However, a strictly sequential view of visual spatial interpolation, where boundary completion serves as a precursor or prerequisite of surface filling, has been repeatedly challenged on theoretical grounds (Grossberg, 2003; Kogo and Wagemans, 2013; Neumann, Pessoa and Hansen, 2001). Generally, these models suggest that spatial interpolation arises from parallel, potentially interacting processes of boundary completion and surface filling-in. In light of these considerations, the neuronal effects observed in V1 might be better explained by the assumption that the signals underlying filling-in are due to feedback that requires more time to reach V1 than it takes for the local computations underlying boundary completion to conclude. Is there any further empirical evidence that supports such a parallelized model of spatial interpolation?


Surface filling-in as a determinant of boundary completion

Support for the claim that boundary completion is not required for surface filling-in is derived from observations that demonstrate that the visual perception of surfaces can be established independently of the perception of encompassing boundaries. One of these situations arises under viewing conditions that produce the impression of a surface without an explicit boundary. A simple example of such a boundless visual surface is the homogeneous image created with a Ganzfeld apparatus (a). Under these extraordinary circumstances, a visual surface is readily perceived without any delineating boundary (Gibson, 1950; Metzger, 1930). Another psychophysical observation which exemplifies that boundary completion and surface filling-in are carried by two separable, independent processes is that perceptually completed boundaries and surfaces add cumulatively to increase the saliency of visual objects (Machilsen and Wagemans, 2011). In the same vein, backward masking experiments using shapes and their component parts (i.e., lines and angles) show that test stimuli are strongly masked by completed shapes but only weakly masked by the individual line elements that constitute their boundaries (Lo and Zeki, 2014). Both these observations are in line with the assumption that surface filling may occur independently and in parallel to boundary completion.

Another line of evidence pointing toward the existence of surface filling mechanisms that are dissociable and partially independent from boundary completion stems from the phenomenology of illusory figures (also known as subjective contours). Notably, for certain classes of illusory figures, such as the popular Kanizsa square (Kanizsa, 1976), the central region of the perceptually evoked figure is generally perceived as brighter than the surrounding background despite the fact that these areas are physically identical and only separated by a subjective borderline (center). What is more, there are stimulus variants that demonstrate this illusory brightness without eliciting a well-defined subjective boundary, an effect that is somewhat reminiscent of neon color spreading (right). Yet, different versions of the stimulus evoke a vivid subjective contour without the concurring change in perceived brightness (left). In other words, the phenomenology of certain illusory figures suggests that boundary completion and the spatial spread of a visual property such as brightness or color across a surface are dissociable and do not depend upon each other.

Since the perception of illusory figures requires interpolation of both boundaries and surfaces across different regions of a physically homogeneous visual field, this class of stimuli also provides a unique opportunity for studying the neurophysiological correlates and the respective spatiotemporal relationship between boundary completion and surface filling-in. Two recent studies using these stimuli have posed challenges to a strictly serial hierarchical model of boundary completion and surface filling-in. In the first study, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was used to investigate the role of both early and late cortical areas in the visual processing of illusory figures. Online TMS was used to disrupt signaling in V1/V2 and in the shape-selective lateral occipital area (LOC) at various time points while participants performed a discrimination task involving a Kanizsa-type illusory figure (Wokke et al., 2013). Results suggest that both V1/V2 and LOC are causally involved in the perceptual completion of illusory figures. However, the critical time window during which focal TMS disrupted perception occurred earlier for LOC (∼100 ms) than for V1/V2 (∼160 ms). The temporal specificity with which TMS to V1 affected perception can be explained by a critical processing period during which surface (i.e., shape) specific feedback interacts with the edge extraction and boundary completion computed in V1/V2. In other words, the neuronal signals related to surface filling-in might interact with and modulate the neuronal signals associated with boundary completion.

Further support for non-sequential ordering of boundary completion and surface filling-in stems from recent single neuron recordings in macaque monkeys viewing Kanizsa-type illusory figures (Cox et al., 2013). In this study, spiking activity in area V4 was differentially affected by exposure to the illusory boundary, the illusory surface, or the physical edge. Specifically, V4 neurons showed stronger spiking responses for the illusion-promoting stimulus configurations compared to controls when their peak visual field sensitivity, or receptive field focus (RFF), was centered on the illusory surface or its encompassing subjective contour compared to being centered on the illusion-inducing image elements (a–b). Strictly, sequential models of visual spatial interpolation predict that neuronal responses to visual boundaries precede those for surfaces, which should extend to this illusion. However, the response enhancement for the illusory shape emerged in the population of surface-focused neurons at the same time, if not earlier, than in the contour-focused neurons (c–d). Taken together, these results suggest an active role of V4 neurons in boundary completion and surface filling-in, with the neural underpinnings of surface filling-in occurring simultaneous to—or perhaps even before—the process of boundary completion.


Boundary completion and surface filling-in as parallel and interacting processes

The combined results of the empirical studies outlined above suggest that a certain degree of surface segregation, based on partial boundaries or other aspects of global stimulus configuration, may sometimes occur before surface boundaries are completely delineated by the visual system. Several possible relationships between surface filling-in and boundary completion can be conceptualized to explain these findings. One possibility is that both processes are initiated in parallel. While boundary completion operates on input from edge detection, the extraction of visual surfaces might operate on the low spatial frequency components of the retinal image that provide information about global variations in brightness and hue (Haynes, Lotto and Rees, 2004; Komatsu, Murakami and Kinoshita, 1996). Another possibility, though not completely exclusive from the former, is that the processes of surface extraction and boundary completion are initially separated but interact at later stages to compute visual shapes. Notably, this model allows for processes related to surface filling-in to solidify boundary representations, especially when boundaries are difficult to resolve or visually ambiguous. Neurons that signal border-ownership, that is, neurons that encode both the boundary as well as the surface that the boundary belongs to, might play a crucial role in this process. These neurons have been found throughout early visual cortex (V1-V4) (Zhou, Friedman and von der Heydt, 2000). Boundary completion and surface filling-in thus might be conceptualized as two distinct processing phases that either exist on the same horizontal plane within a larger visual hierarchy, or as two elements within an organizational scheme with a more flexible rank order.


Autonomic correlates of seeing one’s own face in patients with disorders of consciousness

Sergio Bagnato, Cristina Boccagni, Caterina Prestandrea, Giuseppe Galardi — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC6307552, CC BY 4.0.

The ability to recognize one’s own face is a hallmark of self-awareness. In healthy subjects, the sympathetic skin response evoked by self-face recognition has a greater area under the curve of the signal than responses evoked by other visual stimuli. We evaluated the sympathetic skin responses evoked by self-face images and by six other visual stimuli (conditions) in 15 patients with severe disorders of consciousness and in 15 age-matched healthy subjects. Under all conditions, the evoked area of the sympathetic skin response was smaller in patients with unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, intermediate in patients in a minimally conscious state, and greater in healthy subjects. In patients with unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, no differences were found between the sympathetic skin response area evoked by self-face images and those evoked by other conditions. In patients in a minimally conscious state, the area of the sympathetic skin response evoked by self-face presentation was greater than those evoked by other conditions, even if statistical significance was reached only in the comparison to other stimuli not involving a real face. This finding may be due to the inability of these patients to differentiate their own face from those of others. Taken together, these results probably reflect a varying level of self-awareness between patients with unresponsive wakefulness syndrome and patients in a minimally conscious state, and suggest that the autonomic correlate of self-awareness may have some diagnostic implications for these patients.

Keywords: autonomic nervous system, minimally conscious state, sympathetic skin response, unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, vegetative state.


Introduction

Distinguishing patients with a very low level of consciousness (i.e. who are in a minimally conscious state [MCS]) from patients who are fully unconscious (i.e. who have unresponsive wakefulness syndrome [UWS]) can be a difficult task. UWS (previously known as vegetative state) and MCS can result from severe brain injuries that deeply affect the ability of the brain to generate consciousness. Patients with UWS are able to open their eyes spontaneously, but they lack any sign of self- or environmental awareness (Royal College of Physicians, 2003). The MCS represents the lowest level of consciousness in which awareness can be detected. Patients in an MCS display inconsistent but clear evidence of awareness, such as ocular fixation, localization of noxious stimuli, intelligible verbalization, intentional communication, or the ability to follow simple commands (Giacino et al., 2002).

Differential diagnosis between UWS and MCS raises serious problems, because the current diagnostic criteria are still based on a careful (but subjective) clinical assessment of the patient’s spontaneous and elicited behaviors (Giacino et al., 2002; Royal College of Physicians, 2003). Diagnostic errors arise from the difficulty of assessing low levels of responsiveness because conscious behavior may be highly variable, especially in the first phases of emersion from UWS, or because motor (e.g. paralysis) or cognitive deficits (e.g. aphasia) may prevent the patient from demonstrating consciousness in specific assessment tasks (Giacino et al., 2013). As a result, an alarmingly high rate of misdiagnosis with UWS has been reported in patients who were actually in an MCS (Schnakers et al., 2009).

A way to discover some potential signs of awareness in noncommunicative patients is to gain access to their emotional contents by evaluating their autonomic responses, such as through the sympathetic skin response (SSR) evoked by a visual stimulus. The SSR is generated in the deep layers of the skin by a reflex activation of the sweat glands via cholinergic sudomotor sympathetic efferents (Vetrugno et al., 2003). Although the central organization of the SSR is not completely understood, the SSR is likely to be influenced by inputs from the basal ganglia, the premotor cortex, the temporal and frontal cortexes, as well as the hypothalamus and limbic system (Claus and Schodorf, 1999; Vetrugno et al., 2003). The SSR is easily recorded via electrodes placed on a hand or foot, and SSR recording is considered to be a noninvasive approach for investigating the function of the sympathetic system. For clinical purposes, the most commonly used stimulus to evoke the SSR is an electric shock delivered to a peripheral nerve, most frequently the median or ulnar nerve. However, several other modalities may evoke an SSR, such as mental calculation, deep breathing, an acoustic stimulus or flash, and other forms of somatic or mental stress (Vetrugno et al., 2003). As the SSR may be deeply affected by the subject’s emotional state, it is usually considered a psychophysiological response.

Recently, we elaborated a new paradigm for evaluating the sizes (areas) of SSRs evoked by the recognition of one’s own face, or “self-face,” compared to other faces or images (conditions) (Bagnato et al., 2010). The most interesting result was that the SSR size was greatest when participants were shown their face compared to other stimuli. This result was probably due to a peculiar interaction between the cerebral areas involved in self-face recognition and the structures of the sympathetic vegetative system implicated in the genesis of SSRs (Bagnato et al., 2010). In this study, we tested the hypothesis that SSRs evoked by different visual stimuli, including one’s own face, may be useful in differentiating conscious from unconscious behaviors in patients with severe disorders of consciousness.


Methods


Participants

As candidates for this study, we evaluated 21 consecutive patients with severe disorders of consciousness who were admitted to our Unit for Severe Acquired Brain Injuries. All patients who fulfilled the following criteria were included in the study: (i) diagnosis of UWS or MCS by the revised Coma Recovery Scale after an acute brain injury (Giacino et al., 2004); (ii) age under 50 years (the SSR area may be reduced in older subjects); (iii) presence of an SSR evoked by an electric shock; and (iv) normal visual evoked potentials obtained by flash stimulation and sensory nerve conduction studies in the upper limbs (i.e. sensory nerve action potential of the ulnar nerve). Patients with a previous history of vision impairment or neuropathy were not evaluated as candidates for this study. Four patients with abnormal nerve conduction studies, 1 patient with abnormal nerve conduction studies and absent SSR evoked by electric shock, and 1 patient with abnormal visual evoked potentials were excluded from the study. Hence, 7 patients with UWS and 8 patients in an MCS (4 females and 11 males, mean age 32 ± 6 years) participated in the study (see for a detailed description). Data obtained from patients were compared with those acquired from 15 age-matched healthy subjects (7 females and 8 males, mean age 31.3 ± 3.6 years).

This study was approved by the ethics committee of Fondazione Istituto “San Raffaele - G. Giglio” (Cefalù, Italy). Healthy subjects and the patients’ legal guardians gave their written informed consent to all procedures.


Experimental procedures

Details of the experimental protocol are reported elsewhere (Bagnato et al., 2010). In brief, a digital picture of the face was obtained for each participant (in patients, pictures were from before the brain injury). During the experiment, participants were comfortably seated on a chair and connected to an electromyograph for recording of SSRs induced by visual stimuli. Participants were seated at a distance of ∼3 meters from, and facing, a white wall on which a video projector (total screen area about 112 × 84 cm) projected images.

Seven conditions were previously defined, each consisting of the presentation of a different image: (i) a board made up of 900 alternating black and white rectangles; (ii) a photo of an attacking snake; (iii) the stylized face of a man drawn in black pencil on a white background; (iv) a reproduction of Munch’s picture “The Scream”; (v) the smiling face of an unknown person of the same gender as the participant; (vi) the face of a famous actor/actress of the opposite gender to the participant (Brad Pitt or Angelina Jolie); and (vii) a photo of the participant’s own face (Bagnato et al., 2010). Condition 1 (“board”) was chosen to study the subject’s reaction during a neutral visual stimulus, without emotional content. Condition 2 (“snake”) was selected to evoke a feeling of fear. Condition 3 (“stylized face”) was included to study the response to the presentation of an archetypal face. Condition 4 (“scream”) was used to allow investigation of two major aspects: (i) recognition of a famous work of art; and (ii) identification of a face on a background painted in similar colors. Condition 5 (“unknown”) was intended to study the subject’s response to the face of a stranger of his/her own gender. Condition 6 (“well-known”) was selected to analyze the subject’s response to the face of a well-known actor/actress of the opposite gender. Finally, condition 7 (“self-face”) was used to evaluate the participant’s response to seeing a picture of his/her own face.

The experiment consisted of two recording sessions performed on different days. Each session was comprised of two blocks designed to evaluate the SSRs induced by each of the seven conditions described above. During each experimental session, a condition was projected onto a white wall in front of the participants for 5 seconds, followed by a black slide. SSR recording began the moment each image appeared. The interval between two different conditions was set between 30 and 90 seconds in a predetermined pseudorandom order, but supervised by the investigator. If spontaneous SSRs were observed (e.g. due to deep inspiration), the visual stimulus was not delivered. A break of 5 minutes was allowed between the first and second blocks, during which the subject was invited to relax. After 3–7 days, the protocol was repeated in a second session, with the slides being shown again in a different random order. shows a schematic representation of the experimental design.


Data acquisition and analysis

The SSRs evoked by the visual stimuli were recorded with a standard electromyograph (Micromed System PLUS Evolution, Mogliano Veneto, TV, Italy). The SSRs were acquired bilaterally (bandpass 0.1–10 Hz) from a pair of Ag–AgCl surface electrodes placed on the participant’s hand, with the cathode on the center of the palm and the anode on the corresponding region on the back of the hand. The ground electrode was placed on the right forearm. For each recorded SSR, the area under the curve of the signal (measured for all peaks and expressed in microvolts per second) was analyzed.

Single subjects data are reported as the mean of the SSRs area recorded from both hands in all sections (four recording blocks) ± SD. The purpose of the statistical analysis was to evaluate whether the characteristics of SSRs induced by different visual stimuli were related to the conditions (the seven projected images) and to the different groups (healthy subjects, patients in an MCS, patients with UWS). Thus, a repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factor “condition” (seven levels: condition 1 vs. condition 2, vs. condition 3,… vs. condition 7) was used as the within-subjects factor and the factor “group” (three levels: healthy subjects vs. patients in an MCS, vs. patients with UWS) as the between-subjects factor. For each condition, the mean of the SSRs recorded from both hands in all sections (four recording blocks) was considered in the statistical analysis. Mauchly’s test was used to evaluate the sphericity of variances. The Greenhouse–Geisser method was applied, if necessary, to correct for nonsphericity. Conditional on a significant F-value, posthoc comparisons were performed with the Tukey honest significant difference test. For all analyses, a P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.


Data availability statement

Data is available on request.


Results

The SSR area evoked by one’s own face was greater than those evoked by all other conditions in 14 of the 15 healthy subjects (93.3%), 5 of the 8 MCS patients (62.5%), and 1 of the 7 UWS patients (14.3%). The three conditions involving a real face (i.e. condition numbers 5, 6, and 7) included the greatest SSR area in 7 of the 8 MCS patients (87.5%; random distribution = 37.5%) and in 4 of 7 UWS patients (57.1%; random distribution = 42.9%).

ANOVA showed a significant effect for the two main factors. The significant effect of the factor “condition” (F6,162 = 6.3; P < 0.001) was attributable to the larger SSR area evoked by seeing the self-face in healthy subjects and in MCS patients. Posthoc analysis demonstrated that the SSR area evoked by the self-face was significantly greater than that evoked by the other conditions (“face” vs. “board,” “snake,” “stylized face,” “scream,” “unknown,” or “well-known,” P < 0.001). No significant effects were found between the other conditions.

The significant effect of the factor “group” (F2,27 = 3.5; P = 0.04) was due to the overall SSR area, which was greater in healthy subjects, intermediate in MCS patients, and smaller in UWS patients. Posthoc analysis showed a significant difference between healthy subjects and patients with UWS (P = 0.04), but no significant differences between healthy subjects and MCS patients (P = 0.4) or between MCS patients and UWS patients (P = 0.5).

No significant “condition-by-group” interaction was found (F12,162 = 1.6; P = 0.08). This result was attributable to the fact that both healthy subjects and MCS patients had greater SSR areas evoked by presentation of the self-face compared to the other conditions. Although patients with UWS showed a different result (i.e. no difference among SSR areas evoked by self-face compared to the other conditions), this result was not sufficient to achieve a significant “condition-by-group” interaction among the three groups.

Post hoc analysis demonstrated that the SSR area evoked by self-face presentation was always significantly greater than that evoked by the other conditions in healthy subjects (“self-face” vs. “board,” “snake,” “stylized face,” “scream,” “unknown,” or “well-known,” P < = 0.01). In MCS patients, the SSR area evoked by self-face presentation was significantly greater than that evoked by the other conditions only when recognition of a real face was not required (i.e. “self-face” vs. “board,” “snake,” or “stylized face,” P = 0.02; “face” vs. “scream,” P < 0.01). Conversely, no significant differences were found between the SSR areas evoked by presentation of the self-face and presentation of a real face (i.e. “self-face” vs. “unknown” P = 0.9; “face” vs. “well-known” P = 0.09). No significant differences were found between the SSR areas evoked by presentation of the self-face compared to other conditions in patients with UWS. All posthoc analyses are reported in the.


Discussion

In this study, we found that the SSRs evoked by visual stimuli clearly differed, both quantitatively and qualitatively, between fully unconscious and fully conscious subjects (i.e. UWS patients and healthy subjects). Indeed, (i) the total SSR area was smaller in UWS patients than in healthy controls, and (ii) UWS patients, unlike healthy subjects, did not have a greater SSR area compared to the other conditions when their own face was shown. Patients in an MCS exhibited an intermediate behavior; the SSR area evoked by self-face presentation was greater than those evoked by other conditions, but this difference was statistically significant only when compared to conditions not involving the presentation of a real face.

In UWS patients, the highly reduced size of the SSRs reflects the disruption of the body–mind interactions due to a lack of external world awareness. It is likely that the extremely low-SSR areas obtained in response to visual stimuli denote the effect of the baseline electrodermal activity only, without any correlation with the presented stimuli. In healthy subjects, the brain areas involved in cognitive and affective processes are strictly coupled with the cortical and subcortical regions that mediate autonomic responses, such as the insular and cingulate cortices, the amygdala, and the dorsal pons (Critchley et al., 2013). However, UWS patients are characterized by multilevel brain disconnection. In particular, several recent electroencephalographic and neuroimaging studies have suggested that UWS involves impaired operational synchrony among neuronal assemblies in multiple brain areas (Sarà et al., 2011; Fernández-Espejo et al., 2012; Fingelkurts et al., 2012a,b; Bagnato et al., 2013; Demertzi et al., 2014). In this context, the unawareness of external stimuli parallels the lack of further integrative processes and the impossibility of enriching these stimuli with autonomic correlates. Moreover, this result did not change when one’s one face was shown, a condition that induced greater SSR areas in healthy subjects and MCS patients.

Patients in an MCS exhibited greater SSR areas than would be expected from simple baseline electrodermal activity. Like the healthy subjects, MCS patients displayed the largest SSR area when their own face was shown. This effect was statistically significant compared with the other conditions without a real face. Although the SSR area was also greater than the other conditions involving a real face, statistical significance was not reached. These results probably reflect the human brain characteristic of having different neural circuits for the elaboration of faces compared to other visual stimuli.

A critical point regards whether these different responses truly reflect a different level of self-awareness in patients in an MCS. Previous studies suggested that specific neurophysiological responses to stimulations with an emotional content may be induced during sleep or in unconscious patients (Perrin et al., 1999; Kotchoubey et al., 2009). Although we cannot provide an unquestionable refutation to the hypothesis of an unconscious processing of faces in MCS patients, some data from the present study and from the literature should be considered. In particular, we found different patterns of SSR responses between fully unconscious patients (i.e. patients with UWS) and minimally conscious patients (i.e. patients in an MCS) when we compared the SSR evoked by the self-face with the SSR evoked by conditions not involving faces. This result suggests that the greater SSRs evoked by the self-face in MCS patients is related directly (i.e. a conscious processing of faces occurs), or at least indirectly (i.e. a conscious processing of faces does not occur, but the presence of a minimal level of consciousness is required), to a different level of awareness. The capability of cortically processing salient stimuli, such as one’s own name or face, is not unequivocally associated with the presence of awareness, because it has been described in UWS patients (Perrin et al., 2006; Sharon et al., 2013; Wang, 2015). However, this cortical processing probably characterizes a subpopulation of patients who have better chances of recovering consciousness (Menon et al., 1998; Sharon et al., 2013; Wang, 2015). Interestingly, it was recently proposed that the brain areas engaged in face processing are also involved in several other high-level cognitive functions (Kanwisher, 2010), which are unlikely to be present in fully unconscious subjects. As a consequence, the use of the self-face as a stimulus is considered particularly suitable for self-awareness evaluation in patients with disorders of consciousness (Laureys et al., 2007).

For better clarification of how SSRs during face presentation correlate with the level of consciousness, future studies might evaluate the profiles of responses in MCS patients with different degrees of awareness impairment. Indeed, it was recently proposed that MCS patients may be differentiated into categories of “MCS plus” (patients who exhibit a higher level of purposeful behavior) and “MCS minus” (patients who exhibit a lower level of purposeful behavior) (Bruno et al., 2011). This categorization reflects a different level of awareness, probably related to a different pattern of neuroanatomical impairment (Bruno et al., 2012).

Face recognition is a critical cognitive function for daily social interactions, and it probably played an essential role in the evolution of mankind (Kanwisher and Yovel, 2006). In the past two decades, functional neuroimaging studies have identified the main regions in the occipital-temporal cortex that are involved in face recognition: namely, the occipital face area in the occipital cortex, the fusiform face area in the fusiform gyrus, and the superior temporal sulcus face area (Kanwisher et al., 1997; Haxby et al., 2000; Hoffman and Haxby, 2000). Other patterns of brain activation in the right frontal and parietal lobes have been specifically reported during self-face recognition, and these patterns contrast with those observed during the perception of other people’s (both familiar and unfamiliar) faces (Devue and Brédart, 2011). This specificity of neuronal activation during self-face recognition probably affects interactions with the autonomic brain regions, generating an SSR with an increased area in both minimally and fully conscious subjects when one’s own face is shown. However, in MCS patients, this difference was subtle and not statistically significant when the condition “self-face” was compared to the conditions “unknown” and “well-known,” demonstrating similar sympathetic nervous system activation. This finding may reflect the loss of specificity in the interaction between face recognition and autonomic brain areas in some patients in an MCS, probably associated with a difficulty of differentiating one’s own face from those of others.

The only patient with UWS who showed a greater SSR evoked by self-face presentation (i.e. patient no. 6 in and) had a good recovery of consciousness in the subsequent weeks. He was diagnosed as being in an MCS (with a Coma Recovery Scale Revised score of 17) in a new evaluation performed 4 weeks after the study. This result is consistent with previous reports suggesting that the presence of cortical face processing may be associated with the emergence from UWS (Menon et al., 1998; Sharon et al. 2013). However, these data should be interpreted with extreme caution, because they may be the effect of a random variation of the SSR area among the conditions, rather than a sign of covert consciousness. On the contrary, the percentage of MCS patients who showed a greater SSR area evoked by the self-face compared with other conditions was higher than would be expected from random variations. Finally, one healthy subject did not have a greater SSR area during self-face presentation. This result suggests that the interaction between the neural functions involved in self-face recognition and sympathetic control may have a physiological degree of variation among normal subjects.

This study has some limitations. Patients with severe disorders of consciousness frequently suffer from neuropathies, as a consequence of intensive care treatments and complications (Bagnato et al., 2011). Although both the sensory nerve conduction of the ulnar nerve and the SSR response evoked by an electrical shock were preliminarily evaluated, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that peripheral autonomic neuropathy may have affected the SSRs in some patients. Moreover, UWS patients do not exhibit visual fixation, and some MCS patients show an inconstant fixation only in response to visual stimuli. To overcome this difficulty, we used a video projector that allowed the reproduction of large images. Nevertheless, we cannot be absolutely sure that the visual stimuli were always presented properly in the patient’s visual field. Eventually, patients in an MCS may display a highly fluctuating level of consciousness. Although we distributed the visual stimuli in four blocks over two different days, a varying level of consciousness during the experiment may have affected the results in some patients. Nevertheless, this is a common limitation of all techniques that require a constant level of arousal, such as functional neuroimaging and electroencephalographic studies. Finally, we did not evaluate other measures of autonomic nervous system activation, such as heart rate changes.


Conclusions

These results show that the evaluation of involuntary responses mediated by the autonomic nervous system may help to differentiate conscious from unconscious subjects. This finding is particularly relevant in light of the unacceptably high rate of misdiagnosis of UWS versus MCS, when the evaluation is based on clinical assessment alone (Schnakers et al., 2009). Functional neuroimaging and advanced electroencephalographic studies may help to differentiate conscious from unconscious patients, but these studies are expensive and/or require advanced skills (Harrison and Connolly, 2013). Previous preliminary research suggested that autonomic changes with possible emotional value can be induced by complex stimuli in patients with disorders of consciousness (Riganello et al., 2010; Machado et al., 2011). These studies evaluated heart rate changes in response to different auditory stimuli, but were not specifically designed for evaluating the changes related to a possible self-awareness occurrence.

More recently, responses to visual stimuli in patients with disorders of consciousness have been evaluated in eye-tracking studies (Trojano et al., 2012). This methodology seems to be a promising approach for differentiating patients with different levels of consciousness. Moreover, it has been reported that the visual pursuit induced by moving a mirror in front of patients with severe disorders of consciousness is associated with the sympathetic/ parasympathetic balance and the autonomic functional state (Riganello et al., 2013). These results are in line with our findings. Taken together, these previous results and those reported here suggest that the response of the autonomic system to visual stimuli deserves to be further explored in future studies (e.g. by combining eye tracking with SSR evaluation).

The SSR evoked by visual stimuli, including one’s own face, can be obtained via a simple and inexpensive test, and this approach has potential diagnostic implications in patients with disorders of consciousness. The technique may be particularly applied in patients with a very low level of responsiveness, in whom the recoding of autonomic responses may offer evidence of a subtending consciousness. This utilization is very important, because the evaluation of purposeful behaviors by viewing the self-face through a mirror is part of the Coma Recovery Scale, which is considered the gold standard for clinical assessment of patients with disorders of consciousness (Seel et al., 2010). Although future studies in larger numbers of patients are needed, we suggest that the SSR evoked by visual stimuli, including self-face presentation, may be a simple and useful test to increase diagnostic accuracy during the assessment of patients with severe disorders of consciousness.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data is available on request.


Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence for fast emergence of visual consciousness

Henry Railo, Antti Revonsuo, Mika Koivisto — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2015. PMC6368270, CC BY 4.0.

A fundamental unsettled dispute concerns how fast the brain generates subjective visual experiences. Both early visual cortical activation and later activity in fronto-parietal global neuronal workspace correlate with conscious vision, but resolving which of the correlates causally triggers conscious vision has proved a methodological impasse. We show that participants can report whether or not they consciously perceived a stimulus in just over 200 ms. These fast consciousness reports were extremely reliable, and did not include reflexive, unconscious responses. The neural events that causally generate conscious vision must have occurred before these behavioral reports. Analyses on single-trial neural correlates of consciousness revealed that the late cortical processing in fronto-parietal global neuronal workspace (∼300 ms) started after the fastest consciousness reports, ruling out the possibility that this late activity directly reflects the emergence of visual consciousness. The consciousness reports were preceded by a negative amplitude difference (∼160–220 ms) that spread from occipital to frontal cortex, suggesting that this correlate underlies the emergence of conscious vision.


Introduction

Understanding the neuronal mechanisms that enable humans to consciously experience visual or any other sensory information is one of the fundamental questions of cognitive neuroscience. How long does it take for conscious visual experiences to emerge? Theories differ substantially in their answers to this question, and consequently, there are significant differences in the interpretation of empirically observed neural correlates of consciousness (NCC). A number of brain processes correlate with consciousness, but deciding which of the correlates reflect the processes that causally enable subjective experience is notoriously difficult as there is no way to directly measure subjective conscious contents, and one always has to rely on participants’ posterior subjective reports.

Conscious vision correlates with early activation in visual cortex and with later widespread activation in fronto-parietal cortices (Lamme, 2010; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). According to the early vision model (Lamme, 2010; Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011), early recurrent communication of neural populations within the visual cortex enables subjective conscious perception, whereas the fronto-parietal networks are activated as conscious information is processed further and accessed by the cognitive system. The global neural workspace model (Gaillard et al., 2009; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene, 2014) posits that the early activation in visual cortex is preconscious, and can only enter consciousness if it accesses coordinated communication in the fronto-parietal global workspace. As shown in, in event-related potentials (ERP) that depict the brain’s electrophysiological response to sensory stimulation, the early correlate is a negative amplitude enhancement over posterior regions around 200 ms after the onset of a visual stimulus (visual awareness negativity, VAN) (Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011). This is followed by a broad late positive (LP) enhancement around 300 ms (P300 wave), which is assumed to reflect processing in the global workspace (Gaillard et al., 2009). Both correlates have been suggested to reflect the neural mechanism that directly enables conscious vision, meaning that subjective visual experiences occur at the very same time as the neural correlate.

Previous studies have not been able to conclude which of the proposed NCCs causally underlie conscious vision. Studies that have attempted to shed light on the issue have provided indirect evidence or relied on theoretical arguments, either supporting the early visual (Koivisto, Revonsuo and Lehtonen, 2006; Block, 2007; Lamme, 2010), or the global neuronal workspace model (Sergent, Baillet and Dehaene, 2005; Kouider et al., 2010; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). According to the early vision model, the late NCCs are consequences of consciousness (Lamme, 2010; Aru et al., 2012)—they reflect cognitive processing of information that has already gained access to consciousness. In contrast, the proponents of the global neuronal workspace model (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene, 2014) argue that the early correlates are prerequisites for consciousness—they index preconscious neural processes that precede but do not temporally overlap with access to consciousness. According to this view, consciousness is only enabled through the late processing stages.

Here we employ a simple boundary condition to test whether an observed NCC is a consequence of consciousness: If a behavioral response to a visual stimulus is causally dependent on conscious vision, then the direct NCCs must occur before the behavioral response. Our aim, more specifically, was to examine whether the late ERP correlate of consciousness directly underlies the emergence of conscious vision (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011), or whether it reflects post-perceptual processing that emerges as a consequence of conscious vision (Block, 2007; Lamme, 2010). Our rationale is the following: by measuring the latency of the earliest reports of conscious perception it is possible to draw a definite time limit before which the direct NCC must have occurred for it to be a causal antecedent of the motor response. In our paradigm, participants were asked to respond as soon as they consciously detected a visual target (“fast consciousness report”), and to not respond when they did not consciously see the target (go/no-go task). Afterward, the participants rated how well they subjectively perceived the stimulus. Because it is well-known that behavior may be influenced by unconscious visual information (e.g. blindsight; Cowey, 2010), it is essential to confirm that the fast consciousness reports are based on conscious vision. If the fast consciousness reports are based on conscious vision, go-responses should only occur when participants report seeing a stimulus. Unconscious, blindsight-like behavior would be revealed if go-responses occur also when participants report that they did not consciously see a target stimulus. Importantly, the go/no-go task had minimal cognitive demands and only required participants to access the presence of simple visual conscious percepts as we wanted to estimate the latencies of the earliest reports of subjective vision. Go/no-go tasks have previously been used to examine the speed of processing in the visual system, for example, by asking participants to categorize natural images (Thorpe, Fize and Marlot, 1996; Li et al., 2002). A crucial difference from these studies is that in the present study participants were specifically asked to access their conscious visual contents.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of early visual cortex disrupts conscious vision of simple stimulus features most reliably about 90–100 ms after the stimulus onset, whereas at later latencies (> 200 ms) performance in tasks requiring more complex processes (e.g. visual search or binding) may be impaired (de Graaf et al., 2014). By employing TMS of primary visual cortex (V1) at 90 ms, we were able to create conditions in which a high contrast visual stimulus was sometimes very clearly consciously visible and sometimes not at all consciously visible, while keeping the physical stimulation identical across conditions. Although V1 TMS per se can be argued to interfere with preconscious vision, the NCCs (VAN and LP) should still be observed in the later stages of visual processing. Using concurrent electroencephalography (EEG) measurement we were able to compare the latencies of the reports of consciousness to the NCCs in the same trials within participants. In previous studies the NCC has been calculated across participants by averaging over single-trials, thus losing the information available at single-trials. The results show that the late enhancement of neural activation (LP) associated with widespread activation of fronto-parietal cortices and conscious access (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011), starts after fast consciousness reports of consciousness, and it is thus too late to causally enable conscious vision.


Materials and Methods


Participants

Seven neurologically healthy right-handed participants (aged 22–34 years, 3 males, including author H.R.) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision took part in the experiment, and were paid 20€/hour for participation. Informed written consent was obtained before the experiment. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and it was approved by the ethics committee of Hospital District of Southwest Finland.


Stimuli and Procedure

We asked participants to respond as soon as they consciously perceived a target stimulus in the left or right hemifield (go/no-go task). Visibility of the target was manipulated by left or right visual cortex TMS, delivered 90 ms after visual stimulus onset. Contralateral TMS (with respect to visual stimulus) was used to suppress the visibility of visual targets, while the ipsilateral condition served as a control condition (Amassian et al., 1989). Thus, the contralateral condition served as the suppressed consciousness (or unconscious) condition and the ipsilateral condition served as the conscious condition. We employed the 90 ms TMS delay to maximize the suppressive effect of TMS. Hence our aim is not to target VAN or LP specifically with TMS, but to produce a condition in which conscious visibility is decreased (contralateral) or not (ipsilateral).

Visual stimuli were presented on a gray background (8.3 cd/m2) on a 19-inch CRT monitor set to 85 Hz (11.8 ms/frame). The target stimulus was a 0.8° black and white Gaussian luminance-modulated grating (5 cycles/degree) which was presented in the lower left or right hemifield (2.1° from fixation) for one screen refresh. A fixation cross was presented in the middle of the screen before (800–1700 ms), during, and after (1500 ms) the target stimulus.

The participant’s task was to fixate the center of the screen, and press a button on a gamepad as soon as she saw a stimulus in the lower left or right quadrant of the screen. They were instructed not to press the button when they did not see the target stimulus. Depending on the test session, this go/no-go response was given using the index finger of the left or right hand (order was counterbalanced). After the go/no-go response the participant reported what she had seen by pressing one of four buttons on the gamepad with her right thumb (Sandberg et al., 2010). The response alternatives were: 0—did not see anything, 1—I saw a brief glimpse of the target, 2—I saw the target but it was somewhat unclear, or 3—I saw the target clearly.

Each participant participated in two test sessions performed on separate days. During each session a participant completed 5–7 experimental blocks consisting of 56 trials. Each block contained the following conditions, presented in random order: 1—Visual target presented alone (Visonly), 2—Visual target presented together with TMS (contralateral or ipsilateral with respect to visual target), and 3—TMS applied without a visual target (TMSonly). During the experiment, contralateral, ipsilateral and Visonly trials were each presented 192 times, and TMSonly trials were presented 96 times for each participant.


EEG recording and preprocessing

EEG was recorded continuously at 20 kHz in DC mode with 32 Ag/AgCl electrodes using the NeurOne Tesla amplifier (Mega Electronics). Thirty electrodes were placed on the scalp based on the International 10–20 System. One electrode was placed below the right eye and another at the right outer canthus. Reference electrode was placed on nose and ground electrode on forehead. Electrode impedances were brought below 5 kΩ in the beginning of the recording.

EEG was processed using EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) (versions 11 and 13) and Matlab (version 7.9.0). Before preprocessing, EEG was downsampled to 5 kHz, and the TMS pulse artifact was removed by cutting out 15 ms of EEG (beginning three samples before the pulse). This “mute window” was then interpolated by a third-order polynomial curve (see Reichenbach, Whittingstall and Thielscher, 2011, for a similar procedure), and the signal was resampled to 250 Hz. To minimize the temporal smearing of the ERP waves due to filtering, the data was first high-pass (0.05 Hz half-amplitude cutoff) and then low-pass (40 Hz half-amplitude cutoff) filtered using a one-pass Blackman windowed sinc filter (VanRullen, 2011; Widmann and Schröger, 2012, Widmann et al., 2015). The EEG was segmented to -200–500 ms epochs, and clearly artifactual epochs were removed based on visual inspection. Next, an independent component analysis (ICA; runica algorithm) was run, and epochs that contained improbable data were removed based on the ICA (activity threshold in single components: 5 SD; 16% of all epochs removed in total). A second ICA was run to remove eye movement (Jung et al., 2000) and strong TMS-related artifact components (Hamidi et al., 2010; Korhonen et al., 2011) before ERP analysis. If a component appeared to contain some visual stimulus-related effects, it was not removed from the data. Removed TMS-related artifact components localized to occipital electrodes, and only contained one sharp peak right after the pulse.


Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)

A Nexstim eXimia (Helsinki, Finland) stimulator was used for TMS. A focal biphasic 70-mm figure-of-eight coil was fixed to a tripod during stimulation, and current direction was from lateral to medial during second phase of the pulse. TMS intensity was 70% of the stimulator’s maximal output. The stimulator’s capacitors were recharged 1 s after the pulse to avoid EEG artifacts.

The position of the coil was continuously registered relative to the participants’ anatomical brain image using eXimia Navigated Brain Stimulation system. Anatomical images were acquired with magnetic resonance imaging using a high-resolution T1-weighted 3D-sequence. Single TMS-pulses were applied to the upper bank of the participant’s calcarine sulcus as it accurately predicts the location of an individual’s V1 (Hinds et al., 2008). Left and right hemispheres were stimulated by turns in different blocks (order was counterbalanced).


Statistical analysis

The behavioral data was analyzed in SPSS 19 using a repeated measures TMS (2: left, right hemisphere) × Target (2: left, right hemifield) analysis of variance (ANOVA). The P-values were Greenhouse-Geisser corrected when the sphericity assumption was not met. Reaction time (RT) analyses are based on median RTs of correct go-responses. To increase statistical power, the relationship between RTs and visibility ratings in the contralateral TMS condition was assessed using a linear mixed-effects model (Bayeen, Davidson, and Bates, 2008) in R statistical software (R Development Core Team, 2014). In the model, visibility rating was defined as a fixed factor, and participants were defined as random-effects factors with individual intercepts. The model was fit (maximized log-likelihood) using the nlme package (Pinhero et al., 2014). Because the RT distributions were skewed to the right, all RT analyses were performed on log-transformed data. In the “Results” Section we report untransformed data to make the interpretation of the results easier.

Standard grand-average ERPs were analyzed with the Mass Univariate Toolbox (Groppe et al., 2011) using two-tailed repeated measures t-tests at all 32 electrodes. The comparisons were performed on mean activity in time-windows that corresponded to the previously reported VAN, and LP/P300 time-windows (Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011). In VAN, which revealed a “peaky” waveform profile, statistical analysis was based on a 12 ms time-window around the peak (166 ms for posterior VAN, and 216 ms for frontal VAN). For the broader LP, mean amplitudes were calculated based on 300–400 ms. The Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) multiple comparison correction procedure was employed to assess the significance of each test using a false discovery rate level of 5% despite the fact that tests were performed at each electrode.

In addition to analyzing the standard grand-average ERPs and their differences we calculated the ipsilateral–contralateral difference based on single-trials to examine how the timing of VAN–LP combination related to RTs in single-trials, and within participants. The single-trial difference waves were calculated for each participant by first equating the number of trials in ipsilateral and contralateral conditions (random trials were removed from the condition that contained a higher number of trials). Then the ipsilateral and contralateral trials were sorted according to the amplitude of the most prominent TMS-evoked potential P45 (so that contralateral trials with strong P45 amplitude will be subtracted from ipsilateral trials with strong P45 amplitudes;). ERP-images of ipsilateral and contralateral conditions (including RTs in the ipsilateral condition) were smoothed using five trials-wide moving averages to remove high-frequency noise. Contralateral trials were then subtracted form ipsilateral trials, and the resulting ERP-image was sorted according to (smoothed) RTs in the ipsilateral condition. Finally, the difference data was smoothed (Gaussian smoothing, SD = 2 trials) for better visualization. For a somewhat similar procedure using single-trial differences, see Bishop and Hardiman (2010).

To increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the single-trial data, each participant’s difference data was de-noised using an automated wavelet-based method (Ahmadi and Quian Quiroga, 2013). Briefly, the process is the following: in the first stage, the participant’s average ERP is decomposed using a wavelet transformation defined at different frequency scales (in the present study, four scales were used). Second, the wavelet coefficients that characterize the average evoked-response are selected by a thresholding procedure. Finally, these coefficients are applied to the single-trial data to separate the evoked responses from the background EEG activity. For details concerning the de-noising procedure, see Ahmadi and Quian Quiroga (2013).

For analyses on single-trial differences, the significance of the resulting ipsilateral–contralateral difference wave was assessed using permutations tests with a strict two-tailed significance threshold (P = 0.001) using EEGLAB. This analysis was performed on 1 frontal (Fz) and 1 occipito-parietal channel (Pz).

Onset latencies of VAN were estimated from the de-noised single-trials by searching for the earliest sample where amplitude was smaller than -1.5 µV for at least 20 ms after visual stimulus onset. Similarly, for estimating LP-onset latencies in de-noised single-trial differences, the criterion was: the earliest sample where amplitude is larger than 1.5 µV for at least 20 ms after VAN onset (or after stimulus onset, if the amplitude never crossed the -1.5 µV VAN threshold). We also experimented with more lenient or strict onset criteria, but they did not significantly change the results.


Results


Behavioral results

As shown in a and b, contralateral TMS strongly decreased go/no-go response accuracy (TMS side × Target side: F1, 6 = 15.3, P = 0.008, = 0.72), and subjective visibility ratings (TMS side × Target side: F1, 6 = 22.0, P = 0.003, = 0.78). c shows that the probability of making a go-response increased as visibility of the stimulus increased, and vice versa. When no visual stimulus was presented (i.e. TMSonly condition) the participants correctly did not make a go-response in 83% (SD = 16%) of trials on average (range 6–48 trials per participant). d shows the probability of different visibility ratings, given that the participants made a go-response, separately for the contralateral and TMSonly conditions. If the participants relied on conscious vision in performing the go/no-go task, go-responses should occur only when participants report seeing the target. Indeed, in the contralateral condition, when the participants pressed the go-response, they reported that they did not see the target (lowest visibility rating) only on 3% (SD = 5%) of the cases (d). However, when no target was presented, and the participants reported not seeing the target at all (lowest visibility rating), they pressed the go-response on 5% of trials (SD = 10%; c). In sum, the go-responses accurately reflect the participants’ conscious vision. This is also revealed in the strong correlation between go/no-go accuracy and visibility ratings (r = 0.91, P = 0.005, N = 7).

The median RT to consciously seen (three highest visibility ratings) ipsilateral targets was 301 ms (SD = 44.6 ms) and 269 ms (SD = 98.2 ms) to consciously seen (three highest visibility ratings) contralateral targets, showing that participants could reliably report their conscious vision remarkably fast. As shown in e, the fastest reports of consciously seen targets only took a little over 200 ms. There were not enough trials to reliably plot the distribution of RTs when the participants pressed the go-response, but reported not seeing the target (a total of 28 trials in the contralateral condition; median RT = 280 ms, SD = 147.3 ms).

RTs were not statistically significantly modulated by TMS (TMS side × Target side ANOVA: interaction P = 0.58, main effect ps ≥ 0.15). To see if RTs were modulated by target visibility in the contralateral condition, we performed a linear mixed-effects regression on single-trial data. The results revealed a statistically significant effect, showing that RTs decreased as visibility increased (β = −0.06, df = 669, t = −3.27, P = 0.001), but as seen from f, the absolute size of this effect is small. Importantly, however, the highest visibility rating revealed the fastest RTs. Similar test could not be performed in the ipsilateral condition, because the participants typically chose the highest visibility rating.


TMS–EEG results

To simplify the presentation of the results, EEG data was pooled across left and right hemisphere TMS conditions. This allows a straightforward comparison of conditions where a visual stimulus was presented ipsilaterally or contralaterally with respect to TMS. The left and right hemisphere TMS conditions were also analyzed separately and none of the NCC effects showed lateralization to left or right hemispheres. To examine visual ERPs without the artifact produced by TMS, the TMS-evoked potential (TMSonly condition) was subtracted from the potential evoked by the ipsilateral and contralateral conditions. The resulting visual ERPs were clear with prominent N200 and P300 waves in all conditions. When compared to the Visonly condition, the ipsilateral and contralateral conditions (i.e. with TMS) produced somewhat decreased N200 latencies, and decreased P300 amplitudes. These effects could in part be due to nonlinear interaction effects between TMS and visual evoked potentials (Reichenbach, Whittingstall and Thielscher, 2011). The TMS conditions were also behaviorally more demanding than the Visonly condition, not only because TMS could disturb task-related processing (especially during contralateral trials), but because the participants had to restrain themselves from responding to the TMS pulses alone. This may explain the decrease in P300 amplitude as it is known to vary with task difficulty and subjective confidence (Donchin and Coles, 1988; Eimer and Mazza, 2005). However, note that the crucial comparison in the present study is between the ipsilateral and contralateral TMS conditions which are physically identical, but different with respect to subjective visual experiences.

One participant whose behavioral results did not show any visual suppression by TMS (ipsilateral–contralateral performance difference in accuracy = 0.1, and in visibility ratings = 0.01) was excluded from EEG analyses, as our aim was to specifically study the correlates of consciousness. First, we calculated the NCC difference wave by subtracting ERPs in the contralateral (unconscious) condition from those in the ipsilateral (conscious) condition. As shown in, this traditional grand-average ERP difference wave revealed the often reported NCC (Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011): Compared to contralateral stimuli, ipsilateral stimuli first produced a negative amplitude enhancement over occipital sites (VAN), which was followed by a broad positive enhancement (LP). Statistically significant differences between contra- and ipsilateral conditions, corrected for multiple comparisons, are indicated by white electrodes in.

To examine how the NCCs relate to the participants’ fast consciousness report RTs, the ipsilateral–contralateral difference wave was calculated based on single-trials (for details see Section “Statistical analysis”). Note that the RTs overestimate the timing of conscious vision as they include the time related to the execution of movements (e.g. neuromuscular transmission and the physical movement). We have not subtracted these “additional” time costs from the RTs. To more directly compare the latencies of the NCCs to the estimated latency of conscious access one needs to subtract approximately 40 ms from the RTs to take into account the duration of executing the button-press response (Makeig et al., 2004). The dashed line represents the median RT in the ipsilateral condition, whereas the estimated latency when the command to make the go-response was initiated in the brain is depicted by the gray shaded area in.

The comparison of VAN and LP to RTs at the level of single-trials is shown in a. As seen from the minimal baseline noise in single-trial data (a), the de-noising successfully removed EEG background noise, but kept the single-trial NCCs (shows the data without the de-noising). Visual inspection of a suggests that the early negative amplitude enhancement (VAN) preceded the RTs, whereas the LP enhancement began after, or overlapped with the RTs. As shown in, individual participants’ data revealed similar results. also shows that the participant who was excluded from group analyses because she showed no suppression of visual consciousness revealed the smallest VAN (peak amplitude = −2.7 µV, barely crossing statistical significance), but rather large LP (peak amplitude > 6 µV). Consistent with our other findings, this suggests that the LP does not reflect conscious visual experiences.

To quantitatively describe the relationship between the NCCs and RTs, the onset latencies of VAN and LP were estimated based on the de-noised single-trial differences. The estimated onset latencies of VAN are plotted as a function of RT in b. The onset latencies are scattered around 150 ms, which corresponds to the visual inspection of the data in a. Some estimates of VAN onset latencies precede the TMS pulse, indicating that they do not directly reflect the difference between contralateral and ipsilateral TMS conditions. Because the pre-TMS time-windows were identical in the two conditions, these estimates likely reflect random EEG fluctuations which the de-noising procedure (incorrectly) identified as VAN. However, for the majority of trials, the estimates show that VAN onset latency is after the TMS pulse, but before manual RTs. The estimated onset latencies of LP, shown in c, reveal two clusters of data points. The cluster with the earlier onset latency is too early to reflect the LP, and it coincides with the TMS-evoked potential P45 (135 ms after stimulus onset;). Comparison with a indicates that the second cluster of onset latency estimates corresponds to the LP. Importantly, in many cases (36.2%) these onset latencies follow the manual RTs in this cluster.

Similar correlates of consciousness were observed when the analysis included only unconscious contralateral trials (lowest visibility rating) and only conscious ipsilateral trials (two highest visibility ratings). Due to insufficient amount of trials with complete visual suppression, this comparison (shown in a) is only based on four participants. Although statistical power is thus limited, the results closely resemble the ipsilateral versus contralateral condition, and verify that the observed ERP differences are correlates of consciousness. Furthermore, single-trial difference waves show that whereas VAN always preceded the RTs, LP overlapped with, and in the fastest RTs began after, the RTs (b).

VAN peaked later in the frontal than in the parietal recording sites. The frontal VAN is visible in the conventional grand-average analysis (a), although it only reached statistical significance in the single-trial differences (electrode Fz, N = 6, P < 0.001, two-tailed permutation test). Overall, the single-trial differences reveal very similar results as the conventional grand-average differences (compare the shapes of the blue ERP lines in and a), but allow the examination of the dynamics of the NCC within single participants.


Discussion

Our results demonstrate that participants can accurately report the presence of simple conscious visual contents extremely fast, in little over 200 ms. The onset of the consciousness-related enhancement of the P300 potential (LP), which has been argued to enable the access of conscious contents, begins after or overlaps with these fast reports of conscious perception. Because neuromuscular conduction, direct motor commands (Makeig et al., 2004), and decision-making processes (de Lange et al., 2012) are included in the RTs, they overestimate the latency of conscious access. Thus the LP is too late to reflect the neuronal processes that causally enable subjective visual experiences to guide behavior. The negative amplitude consciousness-related enhancement (VAN), which started after 100 ms and peaked prior 200 ms is more likely to reflect the neural processes that causally enable conscious vision as it always preceded manual responses. The early part of VAN is posterior, suggesting visual cortical origin. Extending this previously reported finding (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010; Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011), we show that VAN later shifts to frontal regions. Our conclusions about the timing of the causal mechanisms generating consciousness rest on the assumption that the participants based their go-responses on conscious vision. The fact that we manipulated consciousness with TMS, which allows studying whether specific cortical areas causally contribute to cognitive functions, is irrelevant for the present conclusions.

During the VAN time-window (150–200 ms), intracranial recordings in ventral visual cortex show enhanced and sustained activation (Fisch et al., 2009) and gamma oscillations synchronize across cortex (Melloni et al., 2007) during conscious vision. We suggest that the early posterior VAN reflects enhanced neuronal processing that allows visual stimuli to cross the threshold to sensory consciousness (Fisch et al., 2009; Lamme, 2010; Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011). This enhanced neural activity in visual cortex may then enable communication with more distant regions, such as frontal cortices, allowing phenomenally conscious contents to guide visuomotor behavior, as reflected in the frontal VAN (Lamme, 2010). The fact that participants could consciously access visual contents in just over 200 ms in the present study suggests that conscious perception of object presence may be enabled by fast local recurrent neural interactions (Lamme, 2010), or even stimulus-driven feedforward activation (Bar, 2003; Fabre-Thorpe, 2011; Campana and Tallon-Baudry, 2013). The function of later recurrent processing could be to clarify and increase the resolution of conscious vision (Hochstein and Ahissar, 2002; Campana and Tallon-Baudry, 2013). Consistent with this, the early part of VAN (< 200 ms) has been shown to emerge independent of top-down feature-based attention, although the two interact at later stages of processing (Koivisto, Revonsuo and Lehtonen, 2006; for reviews see, Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011; Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010). Spatial attention, however, may be a prerequisite of conscious vision (Koivisto, Kainulainen and Revonsuo, 2009), and in the present study, we cannot rule out the possibility that VAN was also modulated by spatial attentional selection.

Early ERP differences are also observed when participants categorize natural scenes using fast go/no-go responses (Thorpe, Fize and Marlot, 1996). However, the natural scene categorization RTs are clearly longer (median RTs > 400 ms; Thorpe, Fize and Marlot, 1996; Li et al., 2002; Koivisto, Kastrati and Revonsuo, 2014) than the fast consciousness reports observed in the present study. Whereas the fastest rapid visual categorization responses have been assumed to be based on unconscious visual information (Fabre-Thorpe, 2011), our results strongly suggest that participants can consciously access visual information in just over 200 ms. In line with our results, Koivisto et al. (2014) observed that participants typically reported being conscious of the scene contents during the fastest scene categorization responses, and observed that RTs increased as the rated level of consciousness decreased (Koivisto et al., 2014). In the study, scene visibility was manipulated by object substitution masking, which is assumed to interfere with recurrent processing (Di Lollo, Enns and Rensink, 2000). As object substitution masking did not decrease categorization accuracy, but slowed down RTs, the authors concluded that whereas conscious natural scene categorization may rely on fast feedforward inputs, recurrent processing was necessary for detailed conscious perception (Koivisto, Kastrati and Revonsuo, 2014). Although the present results imply that simple visuomotor access of conscious contents is independent of late processing in the global workspace, more complicated, attention-dependent manipulation (e.g. conscious recognition) of conscious visual contents could require the late activity.

The present findings are in line with earlier reports that have dissociated the LP and conscious perception. By using visual masking, Koivisto et al. (2006) observed that LP amplitude was strongly reduced when participants attended to local target features as compared with attending to global features, although in both conditions the participants were aware of the stimulus (See also Eimer and Mazza, 2005; Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2008). These findings were recently extended by Pitts et al. (2014), who showed that the P3 was only observed when participants consciously processed task-relevant information. The authors noted that the P3 could thus still be considered sufficient, but not necessary, for conscious perception. However, a P3 wave may be elicited even by stimuli that remain completely outside consciousness (in the auditory modality; Cavinato et al., 2012), suggesting that it can be completely dissociated from conscious perception.

As stimuli that are suppressed from consciousness by early visual cortex TMS have been shown to influence behavior (Ro et al., 2004; Railo and Koivisto, 2012), it can be argued that the fastest responses were based on unconscious information, and that the visual information later crossed the threshold to consciousness. However, our data does not support this conclusion, and can be more parsimoniously explained by assuming the participants were conscious of the visual stimuli when they made the go-response. First, the above-mentioned counterargument makes the assumption that when the unconscious visual information was strong enough to guide manual responses it was also strong enough to later cross the threshold to consciousness, and that when the stimulus processing was so weak that it could not be consciously perceived, it could not drive unconscious responses either. Although this possibility cannot be ruled out, we think that such a strong association between unconscious and conscious processing is implausible. Rather, it makes more sense to argue that one of the functions of consciousness is to guide behavior in situations that require fast responses to weak stimuli. Second, consistent with our interpretation, the trials with the highest visibility ratings yielded the fastest RTs. Third, the participants were instructed to only press the response button if they consciously saw the target. The go-responses strongly correlated with visibility ratings which have been shown to provide a reliable measure of conscious visual contents (Sandberg et al., 2010). This, and the fact that the participants rarely pressed the go-response when they reported not consciously seeing the target (i.e. they obeyed with the instructions), suggests that the go-responses reliably indicated the presence of conscious visual experiences.

Note that evidence for unconscious vision is typically gained through behavioral forced-choice accuracy measures, or through indirect RT methods such as priming (Dehaene et al, 1989; Stoerig and Cowey, 1989; VanRullen and Koch, 2003; Breitmeyer, Ro and Singhal, 2004; Del Cul et al., 2009; de Lange et al., 2011), whereas the task in the present study was clearly more demanding, and required direct, accurate, and fast responses to targets (that were presented among catch trials where no visual stimuli were presented). Therefore, although previous studies show that unconscious stimuli can modulate decisions (often recognition) that are triggered by a consciously perceived stimulus (e.g. a mask; Dehaene et al., 1998; VanRullen and Koch, 2003), we are not aware of any reports that show that participants can respond to isolated and completely unconscious visual stimuli extremely fast and with high accuracy. Moreover, although the fastest RTs are especially often deemed to be initiated by unconscious processes (which may later enter consciousness; VanRullen and Koch, 2003), this conclusion is often made on theoretical rather than empirical grounds (i.e. early coarse visual representations are assumed to be unconscious). In line with previous proposals (Hochstein and Ahissar, 2002; Campana and Tallon-Baudry, 2013), our results suggest that early visual activation (∼200–300 ms) may enable conscious access of coarse visual information (e.g. object presence), although later visual processes may be necessary for more complicated visual decisions (e.g. recognition). Note that we are not claiming that in the present study the RTs were exclusively determined by conscious processing; unconscious processes also likely influenced the RTs. However, we argue that conscious vision played a necessary causal role in triggering the behavioral responses. Nevertheless, future studies are important to verify, extend, and clarify the present findings and the influences of unconscious processing in general. For example, did the fact that we asked participants to only respond to consciously perceived stimuli affect the results (i.e. how much voluntary control do humans have on speeded judgments)? To what extent can speeded motor responses be initiated by completely unconscious information, when no other stimuli (e.g. masks) act as response cues?

Although we argue that go-responses were in the present study initiated by conscious vision, stimuli that remained completely unconscious due to TMS suppression were registered by the brain: they elicited ERP responses (blue traces), but activity was significantly decreased during VAN and LP time-windows. This shows that TMS applied over the early visual cortex can block conscious vision without completely suppressing stimulus-driven activation, which may explain why stimuli whose visibility is suppressed due to early visual cortex TMS may still influence behavior (Ro et al., 2004; Railo and Koivisto, 2012).

Various different methods of manipulating consciousness (e.g. visual masking, attentional blink, change blindness, low-contrast stimuli, binocular rivalry) have revealed the same pattern of electrophysiological correlates of visual consciousness in which VAN is followed by LP (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010; Railo, Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2011). Our results show that similar ERP correlates of consciousness are observed when conscious vision is manipulated using early visual cortex TMS. The reason for using TMS as a suppression method in the present study was that it made it possible to have a conscious condition in which the stimulus was clearly visible (ipsilateral condition), resulting in fast and confident manual responses, and an unconscious condition (contralateral) in which the visibility was suppressed, while keeping both the visual stimulus and the magnetic stimulation constant. By contrast, other methods of keeping the visual stimulation identical across conscious and unconscious conditions (e.g. low-contrast stimuli or masked stimuli, presented near the threshold for consciousness) would have resulted in much slower RTs due to weak conscious perception (e.g. 725–1066 ms in Salti, Bar-Haim and Lamy, 2013). Moreover, unlike in the present study, many of the responses might have been based on guessing and weak confidence rather than on clear conscious perception.

We acknowledge that our experimental setup confounds manual responses with consciousness as go-responses were only present in conscious trials. However, we would have faced similar problems, had we, for example, employed a task that also required manual responses to the unconscious condition (also then the timing of motor-related response might overlap with the NCC). The fast go/no-go conscious reports allowed us to verify that the participants based their manual responses on conscious vision while keeping response selection simple: choice RTs would have led to longer response times. The fact that we did not observe large changes in RTs as a function stimulus visibility is consistent with the assumption that participants could base their go-responses on weak visual signals. However, the extremely low proportion of go-responses during complete visual suppression implies that the participants relied on their conscious vision in making the go/no-go decision. Had they relied on reflexive, unconscious percepts, a significant number of go-responses should have been detected on those trials where the participants reported not seeing the target.

Finally, our approach was hypothesis-driven as we expected to observe the two major candidates for the ERP correlates of visual consciousness (VAN and LP), which have both been observed in passive viewing situations that control for the potential contaminating effects of motor behavior (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2008). Neither VAN, nor LP, revealed lateralization when analysis was restricted to right or left hand response conditions, and neither correlates with RT, suggesting that they do not directly underlie motor responding (See also McCarthy and Donchin, 1980; Makeig et al., 2004; Delorme, Westerfield and Makeig, 2007).


Conclusions

The present results indicate that humans can access conscious visual contents remarkably fast and accurately, and that this does not require the activation of the fronto-parietal global neuronal workspace. At the same time, our results suggest that a widespread activation of cortical areas occurs earlier (150–200 ms) than previously assumed, supporting the early vision models of visual consciousness (Lamme, 2010). In future, the approach of relating the timing of NCC to exact timing of behavior through single-trial analysis may prove fruitful in accomplishing more detailed models of conscious access.


Dual-process theories and consciousness: the case for ‘Type Zero’ cognition

Nicholas Shea, Chris D Frith — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2016. PMC6084555, CC BY 4.0.

A step towards a theory of consciousness would be to characterize the effect of consciousness on information processing. One set of results suggests that the effect of consciousness is to interfere with computations that are optimally performed non-consciously. Another set of results suggests that conscious, system 2 processing is the home of norm-compliant computation. This is contrasted with system 1 processing, thought to be typically unconscious, which operates with useful but error-prone heuristics. These results can be reconciled by separating out two different distinctions: between conscious and non-conscious representations, on the one hand, and between automatic and deliberate processes, on the other. This pair of distinctions is used to illuminate some existing experimental results and to resolve the puzzle about whether consciousness helps or hinders accurate information processing. This way of resolving the puzzle shows the importance of another category, which we label ‘type 0 cognition’, characterized by automatic computational processes operating on non-conscious representations.

Keywords: consciousness, unconscious processing, theories and models, function of consciousness, dual processing


Introduction

What is consciousness good for? What special kinds of cognition does it enable? One prominent way of responding to this question is to challenge the presupposition that consciousness improves cognition – that consciousness is good for anything (Rosenthal 2008, see also Frith and Metzinger 2016). There are a range of experiments showing that precise and well-adapted behaviour can be produced without consciousness (Jacob and Jeannerod 2003; Goodale and Milner 2004). Furthermore, there are many cases where performance deteriorates when subjects become conscious of what they are doing (Beilock et al. 2002). From this perspective it can seem as if consciousness just gets in the way of the speed and efficiency – the optimality – of non-conscious processing.

By contrast, researchers relying on ‘dual processing’ to explain behaviour, often in the field of judgement and decision-making, draw a different conclusion about consciousness. They agree that automatic largely non-conscious type 1 (or system 1) processing is fast and can be heuristically useful, but they also show that, in a range of contexts, type 1 processing gets the wrong answer (Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Evans and Stanovich 2013). It is only with time and deliberate, conscious type 2 (or system 2) reasoning that subjects produce the correct or normative response (Kahneman 2003). When type 2 processing is compromised by cognitive load, subjects will fall into a range of type 1 errors like the conjunction fallacy, anchoring and base rate neglect.

So which is it? Does consciousness get in the way of accurate processing or facilitate it? If a subject becomes consciously aware of what they are doing, are they more likely to get it right or to get it wrong? In this article we resolve this seeming paradox by showing that different distinctions are in play in the two literatures. What at first look like two opposing positions about the function of consciousness, each supported by a substantial body of experimental results, can in fact be reconciled.

One distinction is about representations and the other is about processes. The representations over which cognitive processes operate can be conscious or non-conscious. Cognitive processes are another matter: they are computations from some representations to others. The process occurs ‘over’ the representations: cognitive processes occur through the unfolding of a sequence of representations. The type 1/type 2 distinction picks out two ways that cognitive processes can unfold (or, more likely, a continuum between two extremes). The process can be deliberately controlled and subject to cognitive load, or automatic and insensitive to cognitive load. By contrast the conscious/non-conscious distinction picks out two ways that representations can figure in cognition. They can be part of the conscious mental life of the subject, or not.

The apparent paradox we started with is dispelled when this distinction is made clear. Focusing on representations, there are indeed a number of paradigms in which conscious representations lead to different behavioural results than non-conscious representations, and in which a representation becoming conscious can lead to a departure from optimality. Focusing instead on processes, there are results showing that automatic, type 1 processing can produce incorrect performance in circumstances where, given more time or less cognitive load, subjects are able to meet a normative standard by engaging in type 2 processing. (Whether this is best theorized in terms of a distinction between two different systems, rather than two modes of operation of the same system, is a further question: Osman 2004; Kruglanski and Gigerenzer 2011; Oaksford and Chater 2014.) In short, the findings about conscious versus non-conscious representations are compatible with the findings about type 1 versus type 2 processes.

Once we have diffused the seeming paradox using these two distinctions it becomes clear we need a new category in our taxonomy. The type 1/type 2 distinction does not cover the whole territory. We will call the new category ‘type 0’ cognition. In type 2 cognition the input and output representations are conscious and the cognitive process that occurs over them is deliberate or controlled and susceptible to cognitive load. Most examples of type 1 processing in the literature also involve conscious representations. Subjects are usually responding to a consciously represented input (e.g. a mathematical question), and are usually conscious of what they say or do in response. What distinguishes type 1 from type 2 cognition is that the process that occurs over these representations is fast, automatic and relatively insensitive to cognitive load. To the extent that type 1 processing is characterized as non-conscious, that is usually because the subject is not conscious of the process by which they compute the output. The representations that make up the input and output of a type 1 process are, however, typically conscious. So here we characterize type 1 cognition as consisting of automatic processing of conscious representations.

Type 0 cognition combines both non-conscious representations and non-controlled processing. In type 0 cases the input representations are not conscious and the cognitive processing is automatic and insensitive to cognitive load. As we shall see, it is important to distinguish type 0 cognition from the bulk of the cases that have been given the label ‘type 1’ or ‘system 1’, because type 0 cognition has a different computational signature.

This article will make the case for picking out type 0 cognition as its own category. We show how various theoretical tangles, including our initial paradox, are resolved when we keep the two distinctions clear: the distinction between two types of representations – conscious versus non-conscious – on the one hand, and between two types of cognitive process – deliberate, typically slow, serial and affected by cognitive load versus automatic, typically fast, parallel and insensitive to cognitive load – on the other hand. Section 2 defines the difference between type 0 and type 1 cognition. Section 3 draws the contrast between type 1 and type 2 cognition. Section 4 puts these distinctions to work to understand two sets of existing findings.


Conscious versus Non-conscious Representations: Type 1 versus Type 0


What does consciousness facilitate?

We use ‘consciousness’ to mean both awareness and what-it’s-like-ness (i.e. both access and phenomenal consciousness: Block 2005). So a conscious representation forms part of a subject’s awareness in the sense that it is available for verbal report and use by other consuming systems: reasoning, selecting targets for action, storage in episodic or semantic memory, and perhaps other consuming systems at the personal level. Representing consciously also has a subjective character for the subject – it part of their phenomenal mental life.

There is plenty of evidence suggesting that consciousness, or an attentional phenomenon closely related to consciousness, is important for many forms of learning, memory and voluntary control of behaviour. However, a leading strategy in scientific research on consciousness is in search of something stronger: tasks that can only be performed using conscious representations. For example, it has been variously claimed that consciousness is required in order: to integrate or bind perceptual features (Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Baars 2002; Tononi 2004); to keep a representation online in the absence of stimulation (Greenwald et al. 1996; Dehaene and Naccache 2001) or to integrate motivational states with causal learning (Dickinson and Balleine 2009).

The history of this enterprise is not encouraging. Almost all proposed functions have been matched by plausible findings where the effect is shown to be produced in the absence of consciousness (Faivre et al. 2014; Soto et al. 2011 and Winkielman et al. 2005, respectively). Certainly, there is no clear case of a task for which consciousness is required. Disputes arise because of the intricacies of measuring consciousness and its absence – such that some researchers doubt that there is any non-chance performance without consciousness (Newell and Shanks 2014). So the case that there is actually any cognitive processing of non-conscious representations is far from conclusive (Phillips 2015).

In our view, it is entirely unsurprising that there is no clear case of a task for which consciousness is definitively required. It is misguided to think that the function of consciousness must consist in tasks that can only be performed with conscious representations. The motivation for that is the unobjectionable thought that consciousness facilitates certain kinds of cognitive process. But facilitation is not necessity. Consciousness may make a range of tasks easier. It would be much more demanding to expect any of these tasks to be strictly impossible to perform in any other way. When a particular task is performed in reliance on conscious representations, that works because computations take place over those representations so as to enable the subject to perform the task. There seems to be no reason in principle why the same computational steps could not be performed on non-conscious representations so as to produce a matching pattern of behaviour in the same task. In other words, even if consciousness functions to facilitate certain kinds of computations, and hence the performance of certain kinds of tasks, it would be odd – within a broadly computational/cognitive neuroscientific approach to the mind – if it were absolutely impossible to do the same task non-consciously.

The key idea here is facilitation. If consciousness has a distinctive function, that may indeed be because it is necessary for certain operations; or it may instead lie in facilitating a range of computational operations, each of which could in principle be performed on non-conscious representations. An analogy is the way that books can be arranged on a bookshelf. If they are ordered by subject and author that makes it much easier to perform a range of tasks: finding a particular book; finding all books on a particular subject; finding all books by a particular author; etc. However, each of those operations can be performed on a randomly ordered bookshelf. Similarly, we should be looking for a range of tasks that all tend to be facilitated when the representations involved are conscious. Finding that each of these tasks can be performed non-consciously does not, by itself, undermine the claim that consciousness facilitates the ability to perform all of them. If a representation’s being conscious has this kind of facilitatory effect, that is an important functional role of consciousness.

Although facilitating some computations, a representation’s being conscious may make other computations harder. So we may find that some computations that are performed optimally on non-conscious representations are performed sub-optimally when the representations become conscious (Levine et al. 1996). When an incoming representation is not conscious it may be relatively easy to update all the representations within the same informationally encapsulated module in a Bayes-optimal way. If the same new information is represented consciously it can potentially interact with everything else represented in any of the agent’s cognitive systems, making it difficult or impossible to compute a Bayesian update (Chater et al. 2006). So even if consciousness facilitates some computations, it may make others more difficult.


Type 0 cognition

Type 0 cognition is characterized by automatic processes occurring over non-conscious representations. Models of reinforcement learning show how automatic processes can produce optimal behaviour in some domains. Subjects can learn how to behave so as to harvest near-maximum rewards when the contingencies between behaviour and rewards are probabilistic and changeable (O’Doherty et al. 2003). When presented with a situation, e.g. a pair of stimuli, subjects who have experienced a history of feedback on similar choices can decide which to choose very rapidly, and do so near optimally. These learning processes are automatic – they do not depend on the subject exercising deliberate control and are relatively insensitive to cognitive load (Otto et al. 2013). Making optimal choices in this way is computation-light but learning-heavy (Dayan 2014). This is the first of two examples of type 0 cognition that we discuss briefly in this section. We go on to point to some evidence that consciousness can impair the smooth operation of type 0 cognition.

We offered reinforcement learning as an example of an automatic process that relies on a history of feedback in order to make optimal choices in the present. If this kind of learning can occur over non-conscious representations, that would make it a case of type 0 cognition. And there is indeed good evidence that instrumental conditioning can take place on stimuli which are not consciously represented (Pessiglione et al. 2007). In short, given sufficient learning history in a domain, type 0 cognition can generate adaptive or near-optimal behaviour.

The second example is motor control. In many circumstances people adjust their ongoing movement on the basis of new information that arrives while they are executing an action (Goodale et al. 1986; Fourneret and Jeannerod 1998; Schindler et al. 2004). They do so in an optimal way using feedback control (Wolpert and Landy 2012). Subjects also compensate for their own visuomotor error in a near-optimal way (Zhang et al. 2015).

These rapid adjustments are made automatically, without deliberate control (Pisella et al. 2000). The adjustments are so rapid that it is highly unlikely that a representation of the new target location has become conscious by the time the adjustment is made. That is consistent with the finding that subjects can adjust to a target moved during a saccade without being aware that the target has moved (Fourneret and Jeannerod 1998). When subjects learn over repeated trials to adjust motor output to compensate for an artificial force field (Thoroughman and Shadmehr 2000), one kind of adjustment is also made automatically and without the subject being conscious of the adjustment (the slow implicit process in McDougle et al. 2015). There being an effect of non-conscious representations on perceptuomotor control in this way is consistent with the finding that perceptual learning about motion direction can occur without the direction of motion presented being consciously represented (T. Watanabe et al. 2001). In short, fine-grained online motor control rapidly performs complex computations over non-conscious representations, computations that meet a normative criterion.

Thus, model-free reinforcement learning can generate optimal decisions when making choices for rewards, and feedback control can compute optimal action trajectories. In both of these examples of type 0 cognition, non-conscious representation goes hand-in-hand with correct performance. Furthermore, when both systems make predictions about the same outcome, there is evidence that their outputs are integrated in a way that produces normatively appropriate behavioural output (O’Reilly et al. 2013).

Type 0 cognition is likely to play a large role in several other domains, for example in the rich inferences which occur automatically and without consciousness in the course of perception, language comprehension and language production.

Any input is potentially relevant to where to reach and whether to keep reaching. The fact that a colleague’s phone rings may mean, by a subtle chain of reasoning, that I should pick up the target object with the other hand. But the type 0 computations we have been discussing don’t make use of domain-general information. They are only performed on a very limited subset of incoming information (e.g. about the location and motion of the target) – information whose relevance to action execution subjects will have been able to learn about in the past. For example, the subjects in Pisella et al. (2000) performed rapid corrections in response to changes in target location but not in response to changes in target colour. The ‘automatic pilot’ mechanism of perceptuomotor control appears to be unable to make adjustments to take account of relevant colour information. We hypothesize that type 0 cognition is poor at integrating information from previously unconnected domains.

On the other hand, when representations become conscious behaviour may be less accurate than that produced by type 0 cognition. Subjects viewing a hollow face have a conscious experience that it is a normal convex face and make judgements about the location of small targets placed on the face accordingly. However, their rapid reaching movements are correctly targeted at the true location of the targets (i.e. further away than conscious experience represents them to be: Kroliczak et al. 2006). In line with the evidence above that rapid reaching movements are controlled by non-conscious representations of the target, it seems that type 0 cognition is able to drive correct performance in this context, while at the same time the judgements made on the basis of conscious representations are incorrect. There is also wider evidence that dorsal stream representations controlling action execution are not conscious (Jacob and Jeannerod 2003; Goodale and Milner 2004). The automatic post-error slowing observed in skilled typists may also be the result of type 0 cognition – it is independent at least of conscious visual representations of the letters produced (Logan and Crump 2010).

Similarly, consciousness or conscious attention can interfere with the smooth execution of actions controlled by type 0 cognition (Jueptner et al. 1997). For some high level sporting skills, the performance of expert practitioners is impaired when they attend more to what they are doing (Beilock et al. 2002). Motor skill learning can also be impaired by conscious reflection (Fletcher et al. 2005; McKay et al. 2015). In these cases conscious attention to aspects of the task appears to increase the processing demands and to lead to slower and less accurate performance. This is comparable to the way that performance on a task is impaired when the stimulus set or response set is increased (Hick 1952).

In short, type 0 cognition performs rapid and accurate computations on a limited range of information. It avoids the costs in speed and accuracy that would follow from bringing a wider range of information to bear on performing a task.


Type 1 cognition

Type 1 cognition is characterized by automatic, load-insensitive processing of consciously represented inputs; outputs are typically also conscious. Experiments contrasting conscious with non-conscious processing suggest that processing in perceptual areas of the brain is not sufficient for a representation of a stimulus to become conscious in our sense. Conscious representation goes with activation of prefrontal cortex (particularly dorsolateral prefrontal cortex), usually together with inferior parietal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex (Dehaene et al. 2014). Our hypothesis is that, compared with type 0 cognition, consciousness facilitates the processing together of representations drawn from domains that have not previously been extensively associated.

It is hardly surprising that consciousness allows representations from previously unconnected domains to be integrated for computational processing, since by ‘conscious’ we mean (in part) access conscious. Access conscious representations are available to a range of personal-level consuming systems (verbal report, goal-directed reasoning, episodic memory storage, etc.). That is not equivalent to making information globally available, which may be a wider form of availability (e.g. to subpersonal systems), but our definition does require conscious representations to be reasonably widely available. A representation encapsulated in a domain-specific module, inaccessible to reasoning or verbal report, does not count as conscious as we are using the term. But nor would processing of a representation by deliberate reasoning on its own make a representation conscious, if that representation were not globally available.

Although some have claimed that consciousness is necessary for information integration (Singer 1998; Tononi 2008), the discussion in the section ‘What does consciousness facilitate?’ suggests that we should consider a more modest hypothesis: that consciousness facilitates information integration. And it does indeed appear that the necessity claim is too strong – multisensory integration can occur between subliminally presented stimuli (Faivre et al. 2014). However in the Faivre et al. (2014) paradigm, integration of non-conscious representations only occurred when participants had undergone previous conscious training on stimuli of the same kind. Prior consciousness thereby facilitated information integration. Indeed, it remains empirically open that, in the absence of the opportunity for extensive prior learning, people can only integrate non-conscious representations that have previously been associated consciously (Mudrik et al. 2014).

The role of consciousness in facilitating information integration can be seen in several paradigms in which local regularities are registered unconsciously but global regularities are only detected when stimuli are consciously represented. For example, subjects can extract a global pattern in incoming speech sounds when they are conscious (the fact that the sequence ‘aaaaB’ is repeated – Strauss et al. 2015). Sensitivity to violations of the global pattern is abolished in sleeping subjects, although sensitivity to violation of a local pattern remains (e.g. when a ‘B’ occurs in the sequence ‘aaaaB’: ‘passive sensory response adaptation’). Similarly, trace conditioning was abolished in one group of patients with disorders of consciousness; while delay conditioning, which is more local, was preserved (Bekinschtein et al. 2009).

A consequence of reduced informational encapsulation is that computations become more onerous. Bayesian inferences which can be performed in real time on a limited set of data can become computationally intractable as the range of information to be taken into account increases (Chater et al. 2006). Sometimes being able to behave even approximately correctly may require cognition to take account of information from separate domains (domains not experienced together much in the subject’s learning history). Consciousness may allow such processing, but the computational complexity of doing so makes it more likely that performance will be slow or incorrect.

So consciousness makes representations available to a wider range of processing, and processing that occurs over conscious representations takes a potentially wider range of representations as input. To reduce the resulting computational demands, the amount of information consciously represented about each stimulus or event may be reduced (e.g. Hillis et al. 2002).

For example, a situation that is non-consciously represented as a probability distribution over a range of possible values may collapse into a simpler representation when represented consciously (Stocker and Simoncelli 2008), e.g. of just a single value, or of a single value plus confidence. Stocker and Simoncelli (2008) found that once subjects had consciously decided that a stimulus was in one half of the screen, they effectively discarded probability information about the other half, cutting down the hypothesis space which was operative for subsequent decisions (see also Akaishi et al. 2014; Fischer and Whitney 2014). Along the same lines, Marcel (1980) found that ambiguous words presented unconsciously primed both meanings of the word, whereas consciously presented ambiguous words only primed the meaning that was consistent with prior context. In a similar way but at the neural level, Niv et al. (2015) found that a neural attentional control network did not represent all the perceptual dimensions presented to the subject, but only a variable task-relevant subset. (Interestingly, the reinforcement learning model that best explained subjects’ behaviour continued to include all nine available dimensions, suggesting that model-free reinforcement learning is a type 0 process that proceeds – in its limited way – without cutting down the representational space.) In all of these cases a stimulus’s being represented consciously, while making information about the stimulus available more widely, also goes along with a decrease in the amount of information being represented about the stimulus.

In short, type 1 cognition occurs over conscious representations, which has a benefit and also a cost. The benefit is access to a wider range of information and the ability to put together information without extensive prior experience. The cost is that optimal calculations may become computationally intractable, calling for a reduction in the amount of information carried and/or simplification of the processing being carried out.


Automatic versus Deliberately Controlled Processes: Type 1 versus Type 2


Type 1 cognition again

We saw in the last section that consciousness, which characterizes the representations involved in type 1 cognition, has computational costs. We suggested that this is sometimes dealt with by simplifying the computations to be performed. For example, rather than computing a full Bayesian belief update to take account of a new piece of information, heuristics may come into play. When heuristics are appropriate to the domain, these are the ‘simple heuristics that make us smart’ (Gigerenzer and Todd 1999) long thought to be characteristic of type 1 processing. But heuristics can of course go wrong. In such circumstances the greater time available to type 2 processing may be needed in order to compute the right answer.

Studies of the cognitive reflection test (Frederick 2005) show that people often use intuitive heuristics that produce the wrong answer to simple mathematical questions. (E.g. ‘A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?’ – the intuitive answer, 10 cents, is incorrect.) In realistic everyday settings subjects’ priors appear to be sensitive and appropriate to varying contexts (e.g. cinema or cookery: Griffiths and Tenenbaum 2006), but type 1 cognition may get the wrong answer by applying priors that are inappropriate to the task domain (Fang et al. 2011). Conversely, in other circumstances the heuristics deployed in type 1 cognition get the correct answer where general purpose type 2 reasoning does not (Goldstein and Gigerenzer 1999; Gigerenzer and Sturm 2012).

In short, the heuristics and biases that characterize type 1 cognition are in part a response to the additional computational demands that come with conscious representation. In some but not all cases, given more time to solve the problem, deliberate reasoning is able to produce the correct answer where automatic reasoning does not (Kahneman 2003).


Type 2 cognition

Type 2 cognition is characterized by deliberate, non-automatic processing of conscious representations. It is sensitive to cognitive load: type 2 processes interfere with one another. Type 2 cognition operates on conscious representations, typically in series, over a longer timescale than type 1 cognition. It can overcome some of the computational limitations of type 1 cognition, piecemeal, while retaining the advantage of being able to integrate information from previously unconnected domains. It is computation-heavy and learning-light: with its extended processing time, type 2 cognition can compute the correct answer or generate optimal actions without the benefit of extensive prior experience in a domain.

Deliberate reasoning tasks engage a large array of brain areas (Goel 2007), including the prefrontal and parietal areas mentioned above as associated with conscious representation. Examining deliberate reasoning of specific kinds brings out differences from the conscious–non-conscious contrast, with a left temporal lobe system involved in belief-based reasoning, and a bilateral parietal lobe system involved in logical or belief-neutral reasoning (Goel and Dolan 2003). The effect of increasing cognitive load also has a different neural signature. Cognitive load in general modulates the activity of superior parietal lobule and intraparietal sulcus bilaterally, and particularly of the right inferior frontal junction (Vergauwe et al. 2015). Thus, neural data are consistent with there being an important functional difference between our two distinctions (conscious-unconscious and automatic-deliberate).

One task that relies on type 2 cognition is being able to resist the automatic stem completion effect. Subjects are presented with a word stem and instructed to complete it in a way that differs from a prior masked word prime (e.g. if the prime is ‘table’ and the stem is ‘tab’ then ‘taboo’ would be a correct answer; ‘table’ would be incorrect). There is a tendency to complete the stem with the primed word. Subjects are able successfully to resist this tendency only if the prime was consciously represented (Debner and Jacoby 1994). This ability is compromised by cognitive load (Jacoby et al. 1993). Thus, successful performance of this task depends on type 2 cognition.

A second example is one of the two kinds of perceptual learning discovered by Schwiedrzik et al. (2011). They demonstrated two ways in which prior exposure to shapes can result in improved perceptual sensitivity. One kind of improvement does not require the stimuli to be consciously represented and occurs only in the retinotopic area in which they are presented. A second perceptual learning effect transfers to other retinotopic locations but only occurs when the stimuli are consciously represented. In similar perceptual learning tasks where there is a concurrent cognitive load (a letter identification task), improvements in sensitivity do not transfer to other retinotopic locations (Karni and Sagi 1991; see also K. Watanabe et al. 2006). Thus, the second type of perceptual learning in Schwiedrzik et al. (2011) is likely to rely on type 2 cognition whereas the first can occur with non-conscious stimuli in type 0 cognition.

Endogenous attention also seems to depend on type 2 cognition. It is susceptible to cognitive load (Jonides 1981). By contrast exogenous attention is relatively insensitive to cognitive load (Yantis and Jonides 1984) and can be driven by non-conscious stimuli (McCormick 1997). Those are then cases of type 0 cognition. Attention can affect the way the automatic processes of type 0 cognition are constrained to unfold (Naccache et al. 2002), as can other top-down effects (Yantis and Jonides 1990).

Importantly, type 2 cognition also allows deliberate productive language (speech), enabling an agent to select information to be communicated socially. For example, information broadcast deliberately as a result of type 2 metacognition may play an important role in joint action (Shea et al. 2014). It has recently been suggested that conscious representations of a thinker’s own agency, in particular the capacity to anticipate the regret that may be the result of performing an action, exemplify an important function of consciousness (Frith and Metzinger 2016). That too may be an important way that consciousness facilitates joint behaviour.

Deliberation is an important form of collective behaviour. When people communicate about a problem, they can often solve it together in a way that overcomes the limitations of individual type 1 cognition (Mercier and Sperber 2011; Maciejovsky et al. 2013). Since type 2 cognitive processes typically take place over a series of conscious representations, people can report about the steps involved (Ericsson 2006), and so can share expertise with others; whereas the intermediate steps of type 1 cognitive processes are usually opaque to the thinker (Nisbett and Wilson 1977; Berry and Broadbent 1984).

The distinction we draw between type 1 cognition and type 2 cognition has much in common with standard dual process accounts (system 1/system 2), except that the way we deal with consciousness is importantly different. System 1 processes have long been characterized as unconscious, and that remains a typical attribute even when it is not taken to be a defining feature (Evans and Stanovich 2013). As we characterize type 1 cognition, it takes conscious representations as input, and typically issues in conscious representations as output. It is our type 0 cognition that operates on non-conscious representations, using processing that has the features typically associated with system 1 (fast, automatic, load-insensitive, etc.).

Since our main disagreement with dual process theories concerns system 1, our type 2 cognition is very like standard views of system 2 processing. However, we do not assume that type 1 and type 2 are different systems or that they draw on qualitatively different kinds of cognitive processing. They may do, or they may instead reflect two poles of a continuum characterizing the way a single cognitive process can operate under more or less pressure.

Type 1 cognition and type 2 cognition deal in different ways with the demands imposed by the un-encapsulated nature of conscious representations. Type 1 processing uses cues and heuristics that enable rapid computations whereas type 2 cognition uses more time to deploy the more demanding and typically serial methods of general purpose reasoning. In some contexts a heuristic may outperform general purpose reasoning in accuracy as well as speed (Gigerenzer and Sturm 2012); in others the heuristic fails and type 2 cognition is needed to produce correct or norm-compliant behaviour.


The Distinctions Applied to Existing Findings


Model-based and model-free decision-making

Patterns of behaviour that have been learnt instrumentally in response to reward feedback have long been known to divide into goal-directed behaviour, which is immediately sensitive to the devaluation of an outcome, and habit-based behaviour, which is not (Dickinson and Balleine 1994, in non-human animals). Frith et al. (1992) found early evidence that the distinction is at work in humans: learning the behavioural rule needed to obtain a reward uses a separate system from learning the values of objects or stimuli. More recently, model-based reinforcement learning has been proposed to account for goal-directed behaviour and model-free reinforcement learning (discussed above) to account for habitual behaviour (Dayan 2014).

Model-based mechanisms learn about the connections between actions and outcomes and encode information about the causal structure of a task. Model-free mechanisms simply learn values for actions in each world state. In many settings this calls for considerable prior experience with the task, but makes it very straightforward to compute behavioural choices. Given a model of the situation, it is more complicated to calculate how to behave. For example, when the task is to make five binary choices in series to obtain a reward (e.g. in navigating around a maze) there are 32 possible sequences to consider. Subjects sometimes simplify the computation by reducing the problem space, cutting out some branches of the decision tree from consideration (‘pruning’), which can lead them to overlook the optimal sequence of choices (Huys et al. 2012).

We noted above that model-free reinforcement learning can take place on non-conscious representations. In those circumstances model-free learning is an instance of type 0 cognition. A rapid change in the stimulus-response mapping, on the other hand, seems to require that the stimuli are represented consciously (Pessiglione et al. 2011). These results are complicated by the fact that satiety has an effect on overall motivation, which will also affect behaviour driven by the model-free system. Ziauddeen et al. (2012) found that the overall level of motivation generated by a non-conscious stimulus (cumulative grip strength) is modulated by satiety in a food-specific way. They did not show that the stimulus-response mapping – which action is performed for each stimulus – activated by non-conscious stimuli is immediately modulated by reward devaluation (satiety).

Fear conditioning shows a similar signature, with two different systems at work. Subjects can be conditioned by electric shocks to acquire a fear reaction in response to stimuli represented non-consciously (Olsson and Phelps 2004). However, a verbal instruction that certain stimuli will produce a shock is only effective in producing a fear response when the stimulus is represented consciously (Olsson and Phelps 2004). (Cf. Pessiglione et al. (2011), although that effect may be due to the effect of subliminal stimuli on overall motivation.) So goal-directed learning and instructed rules seem to be beyond the reach of type 0 cognition.

Both the model-free and the model-based systems are at work in many reward-learning contexts (McNamee et al. 2015), with their relative reliability affecting the extent to which the model-based system gets control of behaviour (Donoso et al. 2014; Gershman et al. 2014; Lee et al. 2014). Cognitive load increases the extent to which a subject’s choice is driven by the model-free system (Otto et al. 2013). Individual differences in how much subjects exercise cognitive control in standard tasks predict the extent to which their choices are model-based in a reinforcement learning task (Otto et al. 2014). So it appears that model-based learning relies on type 2 cognition.

Interestingly, Economides et al. (2015) found that with extensive prior experience of task, model-based reasoning about what to choose becomes less susceptible to cognitive load (although it remains possible that the trained subjects switched to a different, non-model-based strategy, or that the effect of the training was to make the concurrent numerical Stroop task less load-inducing, cp. Flaudias and Llorca 2014). More generally, acting on social values seems to involve type 2 cognition: in the ultimatum game cognitive load makes subjects behave more in accordance with their personality type (Haruno et al. 2014).

Experiments on ego depletion and cognitive effort may also illuminate the extent to which type 2 cognition is able to influence behaviour. The relative influence of the model-based and model-free learning systems on behaviour, depending on their respective reliability, reflects a cost-benefit trade off. Similarly, the opportunity cost of devoting type 2 cognition to a problem should affect our willingness to rely on it. The feeling of cognitive effort accompanying some tasks may reflect that opportunity cost (Westbrook and Braver 2015). Thus, subjects given the suggestion that a strenuous mental task will be energizing showed less of an interference effect in a subsequent Stroop task (a standard measure of ego depletion) (Job et al. 2010). The effects of beliefs about free will may work in a similar way. Subjects given messages suggesting there is no free will show reduced preconscious motor preparation (Rigoni et al. 2011) and reduced intentional inhibition of a prepotent response (Rigoni et al. 2012). This may work by inducing subjects to reduce their estimate of the efficacy or reliability of type 2 cognitive processes, thus reducing their effect on behaviour.

In this section, we have contrasted model-based with model-free learning, briefly mentioning three other categories related to the model-based system (deploying a rule, exercising mental effort, exercising cognitive control). We argued that model-based decision-making depends on type 2 cognition whereas model-free decision-making can be performed by type 0 cognition.


Confidence judgements

Confidence judgements as studied in cognitive psychology are found to be an only moderately reliable predictor of the subject’s accuracy in a task (Koriat 2012). By contrast, cognitive neuroscience often finds neural signals of confidence that are highly predictive of performance (Kepecs et al. 2008; Kiani and Shadlen 2009). This discrepancy is explicable if different cognitive systems are at work in the two cases. Internal measures of confidence can be based directly on features of the evidence used to make a decision or on the variance in a perceptual signal (Yeung and Summerfield 2012). Such signals can feed directly into the automatic computations of type 0 or type 1 cognition (e.g. Ernst and Banks 2002). Since noise is the main source of inaccuracy in these paradigms, it is unsurprising that confidence signals based on noise are good predictors of accurate performance.

By contrast the verbal confidence judgements elicited in cognitive psychological work on metacognition tend to be inferred from consciously represented cues like similarity and fluency (Thompson et al. 2011; Koriat 2012). These cues are relied on to form a judgement as to how likely it is that the type 1 heuristic used to solve a problem will get it right. Since the cues are only indirect and approximate indicators of likely accuracy, confidence judgements based on them are less reliable. Vlassova et al. (2014) found that subjects produce explicit metacognitive reports, as assessed by meta-d’, only on the basis of consciously represented aspects of a stimulus. Unconsciously represented information had an effect in facilitating task performance but without affecting meta-d’. This suggests that explicit reports of confidence depend on type 2 cognition.


Conclusion

We started by asking what consciousness is good for – what kinds of cognition does it enable? To return to that question: does consciousness help us get things right or does it make us get them wrong? The article argues that we should divide that question into two separate questions, one about processes (deliberate vs. automatic) and the other about representations (conscious vs. non-conscious). In familiar domains, automatic processing of non-conscious representations can generate impressively near-optimal performance (type 0 cognition). A representation’s being conscious can facilitate some computations that are otherwise difficult, for example by allowing information to be integrated from domains not previously encountered together. However, that also makes the computations less tractable, which can require computational shortcuts or heuristics, which in turn can lead to incorrect performance when relied on outside the context they were designed for (type 1 cognition). Those limitations can be overcome in some cases by our limited-capacity ability to engage in step-by-step deliberate reasoning (type 2 cognition).

Two distinctions that have often been run together using the conscious–unconscious contrast can usefully be separated, giving us a more accurate way of dividing up existing experimental results. However, a 2 × 2 distinction generates four possibilities, and we have only discussed three (type 0, 1 and 2 cognition:). What of the fourth box? This would be the home of deliberate processes acting on non-conscious representations. It seems to us that there may well be no type of cognition that fits in this box. If so, that is an important discovery about the nature of consciousness.

From one perspective, it is unsurprising if deliberate reasoning cannot act on non-conscious representations. We defined consciousness as requiring access consciousness, i.e. the availability of a representation to verbal report and other ‘consuming systems’ of the whole person, like a person’s capacity for deliberate reasoning. So consciousness in our sense implies availability to deliberate reasoning. That definitional point does not alone secure the converse: that deliberate reasoning can only be performed on conscious representations. So that would be a substantive discovery. Furthermore, it is far from obvious that cognitive processes performed on subliminal stimuli should always be invulnerable to cognitive load. Nor that processing of subliminal stimuli should exert no cognitive load. If those predictions turn out to be confirmed empirically, then we will have discovered that the connection between deliberate reasoning and consciousness is remarkably tight. (Which may in turn explain why theorists have tended to run them together.)

We should distinguish two different reasons why the fourth box may be empty, corresponding to two strengths of claim about the function of consciousness: that it facilitates or is necessary for certain computations (see section: ‘What does consciousness facilitate?’). The first option is that there are few cases of deliberate reasoning on non-conscious representations because global broadcast has a facilitatory effect. Without a dedicated input domain of its own, deliberate reasoning tends only to take place on globally broadcast representations. Facilitation is compatible with it being possible for deliberate reasoning to take place over non-conscious representations (cp. Soto et al. 2011). Being processed by deliberate reasoning is not on its own sufficient to render a representation conscious, since consciousness requires that the representation be globally available.

The second option is that consciousness is indeed necessary for deliberate reasoning. One reason why there could be a constitutive connection between conscious representation and deliberate reasoning is if deliberate reasoning is constituted by a series of intermediate steps where each representation that concludes one step and starts the next step is represented consciously. Each step, taken alone, could be automatic, in which case it would be of type 1. Type 2 cognition would then be constituted by a series of steps of type 1. The effect of load could be due to the limited capacity of consciousness, rather than because of an impact on the performance of any of the automatic steps. On this picture it is because only a limited amount of information can be represented consciously at any one time that type 2 cognitive processes are affected by cognitive load.

It is an open empirical question whether cases in the fourth box are merely rare or missing entirely. In any event, the paucity of reports of load-sensitive, deliberate reasoning taking place over non-conscious representations suggests that there is a tight connection of some kind between deliberate reasoning and consciousness.

While there may be a tight connection when we are dealing with deliberate processing, this article has shown that there are strong reasons to think that automatic processing divides into two importantly different kinds: that performed on conscious representations (type 1 cognition) and that performed on non-conscious representations (type 0 cognition). Recognizing this difference not only allows for a clearer understanding of cognitive processes; it also allows us to see more clearly what the effect of consciousness on cognitive processes is – which is one small step towards constructing a theory of consciousness.


Metacognition about the past and future: quantifying common and distinct influences on prospective and retrospective judgments of self-performance

Stephen M. Fleming, Sébastien Massoni, Thibault Gajdos, Jean-Christophe Vergnaud — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2016. PMC6192381, CC BY 4.0.

Metacognitive judgments of performance can be retrospective (such as confidence in past choices) or prospective (such as a prediction of success). Several lines of evidence indicate that these two aspects of metacognition are dissociable, suggesting they rely on distinct cues or cognitive resources. However, because prospective and retrospective judgments are often elicited and studied in separate experimental paradigms, their similarities and differences remain unclear. Here we characterize prospective and retrospective judgments of performance in the same perceptual discrimination task using repeated stimuli of constant difficulty. Using an incentive-compatible mechanism for eliciting subjective probabilities, subjects expressed their confidence in past choices together with their predictions of success in future choices. We found distinct influences on each judgment type: retrospective judgments were strongly influenced by the speed and accuracy of the immediately preceding decision, whereas prospective judgments were influenced by previous confidence over a longer time window. In contrast, global levels of confidence were correlated across judgments, indicative of a domain-general overconfidence that transcends temporal focus.


Introduction

Humans possess robust metacognitive capacities to evaluate their performance on various tasks and make predictions about how such performance might alter in the future (Nelson and Narens 1990; Metcalfe and Shimamura 1994; Koriat 2000). Metacognitive evaluations are often studied by eliciting confidence judgments. For example, a student may predict their success on an upcoming exam by reflecting on their current level of knowledge and preparation (a prospective metacognitive judgment; P-metacognition). After taking the exam, the same student may then estimate his or her grade before receiving feedback (a retrospective metacognitive judgment; R-metacognition). Metacognitive capacity – the extent to which judgments track performance – is dissociable from first-order task performance and associated with distinct neural substrates (see Fleming and Dolan 2012; Pannu and Kaszniak 2005, for reviews). However, it is unknown whether prospective and retrospective judgments draw on distinct or common resources.

Behaviorally, few studies have directly compared the accuracy of P- and R-judgments for the same task and stimulus material. Carlson (1993) compared probability judgments made about future and past events such as “What is the probability that next (last) week IBM stock will finish the week higher than it began the week?” He found that, when the same subjects make both past and future judgments, the Brier score (a measure of probability judgment accuracy) was better for past than future judgments. However, in this case the events to be judged are external to the subject and not evaluations of self-performance. Siedlecka et al. (2016) compared prospective and retrospective judgments of performance while participants solved anagrams. Participants rated their confidence that a particular word was the solution, either before or after their binary response of “yes” or “no,” and before or after seeing the suggested solution. Confidence ratings given after the decision were more accurate than when ratings were prospective. Morgan et al. (2014) showed that rhesus macaques were able to make accurate confidence judgments – bets on performance – both before and after responding to a delayed-match-to-sample memory task, suggesting temporal flexibility in the use of confidence responses in nonhuman primates. However in this study, first-order performance also differed between the prospective and retrospective judgment tasks, making direct comparison of metacognitive accuracies difficult.

There is evidence for neural dissociations between P- and R-metacognition (Chua et al. 2009; Fleming and Dolan 2012). For example, Schnyer et al. (2004) found that damage to the right ventromedial prefrontal cortex was associated with a decrease in metacognitive accuracy for judgments about future recall (feeling of knowing), but did not affect accuracy for retrospective confidence judgments. In contrast, Pannu et al. (2005) found that patients with lateral frontal lesions were impaired on retrospective confidence judgments, but not judgments about future task performance. Studies using functional MRI have shown that prospective metacognition activates medial PFC (Schnyer et al. 2004, Modirrousta and Fellows 2008), while retrospective metacognitive accuracy in a short-term memory task is correlated with rostrolateral PFC activity (Yokoyama et al. 2010). A related line of research has demonstrated that post-decision confidence judgments also recruit rostrolateral PFC (Fleck et al. 2006; Fleming et al. 2010).

Together these studies suggest that humans and nonhuman primates have the capacity to make P- and R-metacognitive judgments about the same stimulus material, and that R-metacognition is typically more accurate than P-metacognition. However, it is clear that there are conceptual and methodological differences between different types of prospective metacognitive judgment. For some prospective judgments, such as a feeling-of-knowing, a specific representation of stimulus strength is available (albeit perhaps weakly) to the system on each trial. For other types of judgment, such as predicting one’s success at a sporting event, judgments must instead be made based on an aggregate likelihood of success, with little or no information pertaining to individual trials. Finally, compared to P-judgments, R-judgments are able to draw on additional trial-specific cues of response fluency, response identity and stimulus type or difficulty, potentially explaining their increased accuracy (Siedlecka et al. 2016). Thus, while previous studies have quantified differences in R- and P-metacognitive accuracy, the influence of different cues and their temporal dynamics (e.g. the recent history of performance and confidence on the task) on each judgment type have received less attention (Rahnev et al. 2015).

The dissociations between P- and R-metacognition noted above referred to metacognitive accuracy (or discrimination), the extent to which moment-to-moment variations in confidence track task performance. In contrast, bias (or calibration) reflects the tendency to be over- or underconfident (Fleming and Lau 2014). While metacognitive accuracy has been shown to differ between tasks (Ronis and Yates 1987; Baird et al. 2013; McCurdy et al. 2013; Fleming et al. 2014; Ais et al. 2016), perhaps reflecting differences in the cues that subjects use to construct their confidence in each domain, bias may be more stable, transcending temporal focus: people have been found to have high or low confidence in their performance, irrespective of task (Ronis and Yates 1987; Pallier et al. 2002; Song et al. 2011; Ais et al. 2016; Hollard et al. 2016). Several studies have found that subjects are overconfident in their judgments (Lichtenstein et al. 1982; Baranski and Petrusic 1994; Camerer and Lovallo 1999; Harvey 1997; Arkes 2001), but in some experiments underconfidence is found (Dawes 1980; Bjorkman et al. 1993; Winman and Juslin 1993). In particular, while overconfidence may be the default in more difficult tasks, underconfidence may appear for easier tasks (Baranski and Petrusic 1994), a phenomenon known as the hard–easy effect (Gigerenzer et al. 1991).

In the present study, we set out to quantify influences on prospective and retrospective judgments of self-performance. We employed the same visual discrimination task for both judgment types, thereby matching performance and task characteristics across temporal focus. We elicited numerical probabilities of success, allowing assessment of both overconfidence (bias) and accuracy of confidence ratings. Retrospective ratings were provided on every trial, whereas prospective judgments of upcoming task performance were made every five trials, before seeing the stimulus. By using repeated, similar stimuli of constant difficulty, we allowed subjects to build up knowledge of their own performance over time (Keren 1991). The elicitation of subjective judgments was incentivized to ensure subjects treated both prospective and retrospective judgments with similar importance. To assess metacognitive accuracy, we calculate both the area under the type 2 ROC and measures of probability judgment calibration and discrimination (Fleming and Lau 2014). We hypothesised that P- and R-metacognitive judgments would draw on separate cues, such as fluency for retrospective judgments, and recent outcome history for prospective judgments, and that metacognitive accuracy and calibration would be greater for retrospective compared to prospective judgments. In contrast, based on evidence that overconfidence is pervasive and domain-general, we hypothesized that overconfidence would be similar across the two judgment types.


Methods and Materials


Participants

The experiment was conducted in December 2012 at the Laboratory of Experimental Economics in Paris (LEEP) of the University of Paris 1. Subjects were recruited by standard procedure from the LEEP database and gave written informed consent to take part in the experiment. A total of 47 subjects (26 men; age 18–29 years, mean age, 22.1 years) participated in this experiment for pay. The session lasted around 90 min and subjects were paid on average €19.7. We excluded subjects from analysis due to insufficient variation (SD < 0.02) of R-confidence (4 subjects) or P-confidence (4 subjects) for estimation of metacognitive accuracy (see below). The final sample included 39 subjects for analysis.


Stimuli

The experiment was conducted using Psychophysics Toolbox version 3 (Brainard 1997) running in Matlab. The stimuli consisted of two circles with a variable number of dots in each circle. All dots were of the same size and the average distance between dots was kept constant. One of the two circles always contained 50 dots while the other contained 50 + c dots. The position of the target circle (on the left or right) was randomly chosen on each trial. Before the experiment, we estimated the value of c needed to obtain a success rate of 71% using a psychophysical staircase (Levitt 1971; see below). This dot difference (c) was kept constant throughout the main experiment, such that all trials were of equal objective difficulty. The position of the circle containing the greater number of dots was randomly assigned to be on the left or right on each trial.


Task and procedure


Practice and thresholding

Subjects initially performed practice trials of the dots task without confidence ratings, in which full feedback was given. We used these trials to calibrate task difficulty. The calibration phase used a one-up two-down staircase (Levitt 1971): after two consecutive correct answers one dot is removed, and after one failure one dot is added. We stopped the calibration after 30 reversals in the staircase, and the value of c was calculated as the mean dot number across the two last reversals of the staircase. Subjects then performed 20 trials of the task with confidence ratings (20 R-confidence and 4 P-confidence ratings) with feedback both on their accuracy and on the results of the confidence elicitation mechanism.


Experiment phase

The experimental design is summarized in. Each trial consisted of the following sequence. First two outline circles (diameter 5.1°) were displayed with fixation crosses at their centers at eccentricities of ± 8.9°. The subject was free to initiate the trial when they wished by pressing the “space” key on a standard computer keyboard. The dot stimuli (diameter 0.4°) then appeared at random positions inside each circle for 700 ms, and subjects were asked to respond as to whether the left or right circle contained a higher number of dots by pressing the “f” or “j” keys, respectively. There was no time limit for responding. After responding subjects were asked to indicate their level of confidence in their choice (R-confidence; 50% to 100% in steps of 10%), using the F5-F10 keys, again with no time limit on the response. On every fifth trial, we asked subjects first to give their level of confidence in getting the upcoming trial correct (P-confidence; same scale as R-confidence). No feedback was given following either choices or confidence ratings. The experimental phase consisted of 200 trials. Each subject provided 200 ratings of R-confidence and 40 ratings of P-confidence.


Incentivization

Subjects were paid according to the accuracy of their stated confidence. We incentivized confidence ratings using the probability matching rule (see Massoni et al. 2014, for details). This rule provides incentives for the subject to truthfully reveal a subjective probability of success, p. For each trial, a random number is drawn from 1 to 100 (l1). If p > l1, the computer checks to see if the subject is correct. If the judgment is correct, an additional 1 point is won; if incorrect, 1 point is lost. If p < l1, a new random number is drawn, l2. If l2 ≤ l1, 1 point is won; if l2 > l1, 1 point is lost. The rule can be intuitively understood as follows. The higher the initial rating of p, the more likely the correctness of the decision will determine earnings. The lower the rating, the more likely earnings will be determined by chance (the second lottery). A particular rating value (e.g. 70%) thus reveals how subjects trade off a belief in their decision being correct against a randomly determined reward. Note that this mechanism is a proper scoring rule and provides incentives for a subject to reveal true beliefs regardless of his or her preferences. Specifically, the expected reward for this mechanism with a subjective rating p and a probability of success s is which is equal to and achieves its maximum for. Prior to the experiment, we explained various possible outcomes to subjects together with their intuitive interpretation until they understood how different rating strategies impacted upon their potential earnings, how over- or underreporting confidence would lead to nonoptimal payoffs, and why it is in their financial interests to report their true beliefs. The final payment comprised €5 for participation and the accumulated points paid at the exchange rate of 1 point = €0.15.


Data Analysis


Metacognitive bias and accuracy

We defined R-trials as those followed by a retrospective confidence rating, excluding those immediately preceded by a prospective confidence rating (160 trials per subject). The remaining trials were P-trials (40 trials per subject), which were both preceded and followed by confidence ratings. We did not analyze the retrospective rating given on P-trials (R* in) to ensure that any effects on R-confidence could not be trivially explained by anchoring to the immediately preceding prospective rating given on the same trial. Global overconfidence (bias) was calculated by subtracting the mean accuracy from the average confidence level for each trial type. To estimate metacognitive accuracy (the degree to which participants can discriminate their own correct from incorrect decisions), we calculated the area under the type 2 ROC for each judgment type (AUROC2; Clarke et al. 1959; Galvin et al. 2003; Fleming and Lau 2014). We also considered that an optimal strategy for prospective judgments in a stationary environment is to assess the average rate of success, and specify this probability on every trial. Thus prospective judgments may be well calibrated on average, but fail to approach the trial-by-trial accuracy that is typically observed for retrospective judgments. To address these shortcomings of the signal detection approach, we complemented AUROC2 with a well-studied metric of forecasting accuracy, the Brier score, which assesses the squared difference between the confidence rating c and decision accuracy o (where o = 1 or 0 for correct or incorrect decisions):

As the Brier score is an “error” score, a lower value is better. We can further decompose the Brier score into the following components (Murphy 1973): where O is the “outcome index” and reflects the variance in performance:; C is “calibration,” the goodness of fit between probability assessments and the corresponding proportion of correct responses; and D is “discrimination” or “resolution,” the variance of probability assessments. Calibration is calculated as follows: where j indicates each confidence-rating bin and N is the number of trials. Calibration quantifies the discrepancy between the mean performance level at each scale step (e.g. 60% correct) and its associated confidence level (e.g. 80%), with a lower discrepancy giving a better score. In contrast, discrimination (D) is a measure of the variance of probability assessments, and quantifies the extent to which correct and incorrect answers are assigned to different probability categories (equivalent to a probability judgment analog of a gamma correlation, or AUROC2). Here we used the adjusted normalized discrimination index (ANDI) suggested by Yaniv et al. (1991), which provides a proxy for the confidence–accuracy relationship normalized by a participant’s performance level and by the range of confidence ratings used. The first step in computing ANDI is to compute the normalized discrimination index, NDI: where o is a vector of success or failure (1 or 0), J indicates the number of confidence levels used by the subject, and N is the number of trials. The adjusted NDI corrects for the bias introduced by the number of judgment categories used:

We assessed the relationship between our measures of P- and R-metacognition (bias, AUROC2, calibration, and ANDI) using Pearson’s product–moment correlations. Mean values of these scores were compared across judgment type using paired t-tests.


Hierarchical mixed-effects models

We examined trial-by-trial influences on R and P-confidence judgments using hierarchical mixed-effects models (using the ME package in STATA). These models allow an estimation of lagged factors with random intercepts and slopes at the individual level. We considered four candidate models of R-confidence and P-confidence.

Observed R-confidence, R(t), and P-confidence, P(t), were assumed to be related to current accuracy, O(t), and reaction time RT(t), past confidence, R(t-i) and P(t-i), and past accuracy, O(t-i). We included lagged factors modeling the influence of the previous trials. The window selected for these predictors followed the frequency of P-confidence judgments (which occurred every five trials); thus we included the previous five outcomes, the previous four R-confidence judgments and the previous P-confidence judgment. We compared the following models:

For both R- and P-judgments, our regression models assume that current confidence is related to objective features of the decision (accuracies and reaction times) and/or previous subjective ratings. To identify the best-fitting models we computed information criteria. Bayesian information criterion (BIC; Schwarz 1978) scores were compared at the group level using Kass and Raftery’s grades of evidence (Kass and Raftery 1995). The difference in BIC provides support for one model against another with the following grades: none for a negative difference; weak for a value between 0 and 2, positive between 2 and 6; strong between 6 and 10; and very strong for a difference greater than 10. We additionally computed the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC, Akaike 1974) which penalizes the number of parameters less strongly (Vrieze 2012).


Learning models

To complement our regression analyses, we examined whether past successes and/or previous confidence ratings affected subsequent P-confidence within a reinforcement learning framework (Sutton and Barto 1998). These models are convenient tools to analyze how individuals learn predictions over time through trial and error (see Daw 2011; Niv 2009, for reviews). We specified the relationship between reported P-confidence (and predicted P-confidence by the following regression equation: with following a Normal distribution. was generated from different candidate learning models:

(A) Objective Model:

(B) Subjective Model:

Both models assume that P-confidence at t + 1 is related to its value on the previous trial t. In addition, both models compute a “prediction error” (in square brackets), which is the difference between either the obtained outcome, and previous P-confidence (in Model A), or the current trial’s R-confidence and previous P-confidence (in Model B). The prediction error can thus be thought of as driving the update of subsequent P-confidence, with the magnitude of this update being controlled by the free learning rate parameter Model (A) only takes into account objective success and thus the prediction error is affected by the accuracy of previous trials, as in standard RL models (Sutton and Barto 1998). Model (B) instead computes a prediction error based on subjective ratings of performance (Daniel and Pollman 2012; Guggenmos et al. 2016): the difference between previous P- and R-confidence. We additionally compared each model to a null (intercept-only) model in which remained constant across trials.

In all models was initialized to 0.75. Best fitting parameters were obtained by minimizing the error term in the regression equation above using a nonlinear optimization routine in Matlab (fminsearch). Predicted values obtained from the best-fitting parameters for each subject could then be compared against the observed P-confidence on a trial-by-trial basis. The log-likelihood of each subject’s P-confidence ratings under each candidate model was entered into the following equation to obtain a BIC score (where L = the log-likelihood, k = number of free parameters, n = number of observed P-confidence ratings):


Results

Subjects completed 200 trials of a visual discrimination task in which task difficulty remained constant across trials. Each trial was followed by a retrospective confidence judgment (R-trials), and every 5th trial was preceded by a prospective confidence judgment (P-trials). Task performance on P-trials (mean 66.8%, SD 10.1%) did not significantly differ from performance on R-trials (mean 67.2%, SD 7.0%; t(38) = 0.33, P = 0.74). The distribution of confidence ratings given for each judgment type is shown in.


Bias and calibration

We first examined subjects’ global level of overconfidence for each judgment type by computing the difference between average confidence and average performance. In these analyses, we excluded one subject with an extreme prospective calibration score that can be seen in the scatter plot in. Consistent with a large body of literature (Baranski and Petrusic 1994; Harvey 1997; Arkes 2001), subjects were systematically overconfident for both prospective (one-sample t-test against zero, t(38) = 3.27, P < 0.01) and retrospective (one-sample t-test against zero, t(38) = 7.13, P < 10 − 7) judgments. Furthermore, this overconfidence was stable across judgment type: there was no significant difference between prospective and retrospective overconfidence (t(38) = 1.63, P = 0.11), and both measures were correlated across subjects (r = 0.43, P = 0.007). Together these results indicate that global overconfidence (bias) in decision-making transcends the temporal focus of judgments of performance.

Within each judgment type, we additionally quantified the discrepancy between mean performance level at each scale step (e.g. 60% correct) and its associated confidence level (e.g. 80%), with a lower discrepancy giving a better calibration score. Retrospective calibration was significantly better (lower) than prospective calibration (t(37) = 2.49, P = 0.017), although unlike for global overconfidence, calibration was not significantly correlated across subjects (r = 0.22, P = 0.19).


Metacognitive sensitivity and discrimination

We next considered metacognitive sensitivity – the ability to track changes in performance with changes in confidence (measured as the area under the type 2 ROC; AUROC2). R-metacognitive sensitivity was systematically higher than P-metacognitive sensitivity (t(38) = 5.77, P < 0.001), and these measures were not significantly correlated across subjects (r = −0.25, P = 0.13). Indeed, prospective judgments did not carry reliable information about subsequent accuracy, with AUROC2 being statistically indistinguishable from 0.5 (t(38) = 0.42, P = 0.68). The same pattern remained for an alternative measure of metacognitive sensitivity derived from the forecasting literature (ANDI; Yaniv et al. 1991). P-ANDI was systematically lower than R-ANDI (t(38) = 7.03, P < 10 − 7), and these measures were not significantly correlated across subjects (r = −0.26, P = 0.11).


Formation of subjective ratings

The previous analyses indicate that while global confidence levels transcend prospective and retrospective ratings, prospective judgments of performance show markedly lower calibration and sensitivity to local fluctuations in performance. This is consistent with subjects monitoring trial-specific decision accuracy post-decision, while leveraging long-run performance estimates to construct prospective judgments. We next investigated how subjects form prospective and retrospective ratings during the task. For instance, we might expect a prospective judgment of performance to be based on past experience of the task. If you have been successful in 7 out of 10 previous trials, it is sensible to predict a 70% chance of success for the subsequent trial – and in a stationary environment in which task difficulty remains constant (as in the current experiment), such a strategy will lead to reasonable forecasts. However, previous studies have shown that subjects do not show optimal learning even in stationary environments, and instead are prone to biases such as the hot-hand fallacy (where a win leads to an inflated prediction of success on the next trial; Ayton and Fischer 2004; Oskarsson et al. 2008). We might therefore expect that the value of P-confidence depends on recent performance, and that either objective aspects of previous task performance (such as accuracy) and/or previous confidence ratings will affect subsequent prospective judgments.

We used hierarchical mixed models (see “Materials and Methods” section) to estimate the effects of previous ratings and previous accuracy on the formation of both R- and P-confidence. and show the regression coefficients for different models of R and P-confidence, and plots the coefficients from the full model. We found significant influences of current-trial accuracy and reaction time on R-confidence, with faster and more accurate decisions being associated with greater confidence. For lagged factors, the previous trial’s R-confidence had an effect on current-trial confidence in Model 2, whereas previous accuracy did not have an effect. For R-confidence, both BIC and AIC scores provided very strong support for Model 5, which included only current-trial predictors (RT and accuracy) and the immediately preceding R-confidence judgment. In contrast, in models of P-confidence, we found a significant dependence on the previous level of P-confidence, as well as previous ratings of R-confidence over the previous four trials. Previous accuracy had a weaker effect, especially when controlling for previous R-confidence (Model 4). The BIC scores provided very strong support for Model 2, which included predictors for previous R- and P-confidence, over the next best Model 4 which included all predictors. However, a comparison of AIC scores revealed inconclusive evidence (ΔAIC < 3) for Model 4 over Model 2, indicating that the difference in BIC is primarily driven by the penalization for model complexity.

In summary, when comparing prospective and retrospective judgments, we found that R-confidence is strongly influenced by features of the current and immediately preceding decision, whereas P-confidence showed a dependence on past confidence extending back over a longer time window (the past four R-confidence ratings and previous P-confidence).

To complement our regression analyses, we fit reinforcement learning models to P-confidence judgments that updated predictions of performance using either previous outcomes or subjective ratings (Sutton and Barto 1998; see “Materials and Methods” section). Model A updated P-confidence based on previous successes and failures, whereas Model B updated P-confidence based on previous subjective ratings. Both models outperformed a null intercept-only model that did not allow P-confidence to adapt as a function of past experience (differences in group BIC score > 100). The learning rate parameter (alpha) in both models was similar (Model A: mean alpha = 0.20; Model B: mean alpha = 0.23; paired t-test, t(38) = 0.63, P = 0.53). The fits of each candidate model for three example subjects is shown in. By comparing model fits at the group level using a Bayesian random-effects model selection algorithm (Stephan et al. 2007), we found that Model B provided the best account of subjects’ data (exceedance probability = 0.98). Together with our regression analyses, these model fits indicate that prospective predictions of performance are themselves influenced by recent retrospective confidence, over and above effects of objective accuracy.


Discussion

Here we directly compared prospective and retrospective metacognitive judgments of performance in the same visual discrimination task in which difficulty remained constant across trials. In line with our hypothesis we found that, despite retrospective judgments having access to additional trial-specific information, participants’ global confidence levels generalized across judgment types. This finding is consistent with a global level of confidence being a stable individual difference that may generalize across different task contexts (Ais et al. 2016). We also found that retrospective judgments exhibited greater accuracy and calibration compared to prospective judgments. This increase in accuracy is likely due to retrospective judgments having additional access to the internal state of evidence supporting a particular choice, rather than only the aggregate likelihood of success (Pouget et al. 2016). In turn, trial-to-trial stimulus variation (such as changes in dot position) may be a potential source of fluctuation in internal sensory evidence. In line with this interpretation, we found that local variables such as current-trial accuracy and response time predicted retrospective judgments of confidence. This is compatible both with theories of metacognition that emphasize the importance of trial-by-trial inferential cues when judging confidence (Koriat 1993, 2007), such as response fluency (Alter and Oppenheimer 2009), and computational perspectives that emphasize a continuous tracking of the evidence in favor of a decision (Vickers 1979; Kiani et al. 2014). Intriguingly, a recent study found a boost in accuracy for retrospective compared to prospective judgments even when trial-specific stimulus evidence was available in both cases (Siedlecka et al. 2016), suggesting that the simple act of making a response may provide a further cue to improve metacognitive accuracy.

In contrast, prospective judgments require learning about the overall task difficulty (which was kept constant in this experiment) in order to predict success on an upcoming trial. Our regression models reveal a differential influence of past confidence on P- and R-judgments: P-confidence was influenced by past R-confidence over a longer time-window, whereas R-confidence exhibited a dependence only on the last rating. Nevertheless, we observed a reasonably high learning rate (alpha ∼ 0.2) for the integration of previous retrospective confidence judgments into a prediction of P-confidence. This recency effect is suboptimal in a stationary environment in which subjects should predict confidence in an upcoming decision based on their long-run experience with the task, rather than immediately preceding outcomes, but is consistent with findings of strong sequential dependencies in confidence reports (Rahnev et al. 2015). However, we note that some subjects did exhibit above-chance prospective metacognitive sensitivity. One alternative, but not mutually exclusive, explanation for this variability is that some subjects exhibit a “self-fulfilling prophecy.” Having rated high confidence, one might then devote greater attention and focus to the subsequent trial such that one’s confidence is justified. In line with this interpretation, Zacharopoulos et al. (2014) showed that biasing confidence levels with false feedback had a positive effect on future task performance. Future studies are required to distinguish between these perspectives on the accuracy of prospective judgments, for instance by asking whether the presence or absence of prospective judgments affects features of individual decisions.

There is increasing recognition in the neurosciences that the brain may use a common schema for trial-and-error learning about different aspects of the environment (see Niv 2009, for a review). This class of reinforcement learning algorithms has been successfully applied to explain behavior and neural responses when learning about rewards and punishments (O’Doherty et al. 2003; Daw et al. 2006), social reputation (Behrens et al. 2008), and during interactive games (King-Casas et al. 2005; Hampton et al. 2008). More recently, these models have also been applied to explain changes in metacognitive variables such as subjective confidence in the absence of explicit feedback (Daniel and Pollmann 2012; Guggenmos et al. 2016). Here we provide initial evidence that subjects’ prospective judgments of performance can also be modeled as a trial-to-trial update based on previous subjective confidence. Specifically, a model in which prospective judgments of performance are constructed from local fluctuations in recent retrospective confidence provided a better fit to the data than one in which predictions were built from outcomes (objective accuracy) alone. How these simple learning mechanisms may affect metacognitive accuracy remains an important question for future study. (We checked for correlations between individual differences in prospective calibration, ANDI and AUROC2 with the best-fitting parameters of Model B but did not find any significant associations (P > 0.05).)

It is perhaps more striking that bias, or overconfidence, is stable across prospective and retrospective judgments. There are a number of previous accounts of overconfidence. The ecological perspective proposes that overconfidence is due to a biased retrieval of heuristic cues when answering general knowledge questions (Gigerenzer et al. 1991). However, this model cannot account for systematic overconfidence when evaluating performance on perceptual discrimination tasks such as the one used here. An alternative proposal is that stochastic sampling of evidence leads to overconfidence (Erev et al. 1994; Merkle and Van Zandt 2006). However, here we find stable overconfidence not only for post-decision assessments that are naturally accommodated by an evidence accumulation framework (Merkle and Van Zandt 2006; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010) but also for prospective assessments of performance that may rely on distinct mechanisms. Our result is instead consistent with previous findings that overconfidence reflects a stable trait that transcends particular judgment types (West and Stanovich 1997; Kelemen et al. 2000; Ais et al. 2016), and that is potentially distinct from variability in metacognitive accuracy (Thompson and Mason 1996; Fleming and Lau 2014; Ais et al. 2016). Our finding that sequential dependencies exist between retrospective and prospective judgments of performance provides one potential explanation for why stable overconfidence is maintained across temporal focus.

More broadly, our study raises the question of the appropriate generative model for prospective and retrospective metacognitive judgments. Recent progress has been made in understanding the computational basis for retrospective judgments of decision confidence (Galvin et al. 2003; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010; Maniscalco and Lau 2012; Pouget et al. 2016). On a signal detection model, confidence is computed by comparing an internal (perceptual, mnemonic) signal to a criterion and then further processed as an explicit metacognitive report. However, this model is limited to designs in which metacognitive judgments are elicited after the first-order task has been completed, and would appear difficult to extend to prospective judgments such as judgments of learning (Arbuckle 1969). In the present study, subjects were asked to make prospective judgments of how likely they were to succeed on a subsequent trial. Information about future success can be garnered from previous experience, and it would be of interest to extend current models of metacognition to encompass learning over one’s past performance as a relevant internal signal for confidence. On a practical level, SDT measures of metacognition are still likely to be useful for analyzing prospective judgments, as they naturally separate sensitivity from bias (over- or underconfidence).

We close with some limitations of the present study. Several trials are needed to get robust estimates of AUROC2, and in our dataset the number of P-trials is low. However, we note that the same conclusions hold when using an alternative measure, ANDI, which does not rely on the same parametric assumptions as SDT (Yaniv et al. 1991). In addition, despite the asymmetry in trial number (40 P-trials and 160 R-trials), due to an incentivized elicitation mechanism each trial contributed equally to subjects’ earnings in the task. Thus it is unlikely that motivational differences between conditions can explain the discrepancy in judgments of confidence. In addition, here we only consider prospective judgments made before stimulus material pertaining to the current decision has been experienced. In other domains, subjects are able to form reliable single-trial prospective judgments such as feelings-of-knowing or judgments-of-learning (Carlson 1993; Chua et al. 2009; Zhao and Linderholm 2011). It may be possible to augment the current task design to more closely mimic those used in metamemory tasks, e.g. by asking subjects to predict how well they will be able to discriminate an identical stimulus in a subsequent testing phase. Conversely, it remains to be seen whether the trial-to-trial dynamics of confidence observed here, such as the influence of previous confidence on future predictions of performance, generalize to other metacognitive domains such as memory and general knowledge.


Self-specific processing in the meditating brain: a MEG neurophenomenology study

Yair Dor-Ziderman, Yochai Ataria, Stephen Fulder, Abraham Goldstein, Aviva Berkovich-Ohana — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2016. PMC6210398, CC BY 4.0.

Self-specific processes (SSPs) specify the self as an embodied subject and agent, implementing a functional self/nonself distinction in perception, cognition, and action. Despite recent interest, it is still undetermined whether SSPs are all-or-nothing or graded phenomena; whether they can be identified in neuroimaging data; and whether they can be altered through attentional training. These issues are approached through a neurophenomenological exploration of the sense-of-boundaries (SB), the fundamental experience of being an ‘I’ (self) separated from the ‘world' (nonself). The SB experience was explored in collaboration with a uniquely qualified meditation practitioner, who volitionally produced, while being scanned by magnetoencephalogram (MEG), three mental states characterized by a graded SB experience. The results were then partly validated in an independent group of 10 long-term meditators. Implicated neural mechanisms include right-lateralized beta oscillations in the temporo-parietal junction, a region known to mediate the experiential unity of self and body; and in the medial parietal cortex, a central node of the self's representational system. The graded nature as well as the trainable flexibility and neural plasticity of SSPs may hold clinical implications for populations with a disturbed SB.


Introduction

In the last decade, cognitive neuroscience has widened its exploration of the neural processes giving rise to self-experience from processes that evaluate certain features in relation to one’s perceptual image or mental concept of oneself (self-related processes, SRP), to processes that specify the self as an embodied subjective knower and agent (self-specific processes, SSPs) (Christoff et al., 2011; Blanke, 2012; Seth, 2013). SRP processes, also known as “extended” (Damasio, 1999) or “narrative” (Gallagher, 2000) –self processes, have so far received the bulk of the neuroimaging community’s attention and have been shown to be closely linked to the subjective content and neural activity attributed to the default-mode network (DMN, Raichle et al., 2001), in particular involving medial regions (Gusnard et al., 2001; Northoff et al., 2006; Buckner et al., 2008; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010). These reference the “self-as-object” (James, 1890) and typically involve tasks assessing one’s personality, traits, name, or appearance. As such, they include higher-order cognitive functions such as evaluation, judgment, and reflective thought (Legrand and Ruby, 2009; Christoff et al., 2011; Northoff et al., 2011). SSPs reference the “self-as-subject” (James, 1890). They implement a functional self/nonself distinction in perception, action, cognition, and emotion (Christoff et al., 2011). In line with this, self-specific features have been defined as being exclusive and non-contingent, meaning that they characterize oneself and no-one else, and that “changing” or “losing” them entail “changing” or “losing” the distinction between self and nonself. So far, neurocognitive attempts to investigate SSPs have employed paradigms which “changed” self-specific features, resulting in an altered sense of agency and body-ownership (Farrer and Frith, 2002; Tsakiris et al., 2008, Nahab et al., 2011; Chambon et al., 2014), or self-identification, location, and perspective (Arzy et al., 2006; Blanke and Metzinger, 2009; Blanke, 2012; Guterstam et al., 2015). These studies highlight the involvement of the temporo-parietal junction. However, no neuroimaging study to date has reported on the volitional reduction of self-specific features, or on the neural substrate underlying conscious experience devoid of the felt distinction between the “self” and “world.”

Other important but still unresolved questions include: are SSPs all-or-nothing or graded phenomena, and can attentional training drive SSP-neuroplasticity? Christoff et al. (2011) argue that addressing these questions necessitate broadening our understanding of the self-experience by incorporating subjective measures into neuroimaging protocols, as previously emphasized by Varela’s neurophenomenology research program (Varela et al., 1991; Varela, 1996). In particular, Varela suggested collaborating with highly skilled meditation practitioners as “… mindful awareness practices can provide a natural bridge between cognitive science and human experience (phenomenology). Particularly impressive to us is the convergence that we have discovered among the main themes concerning the self and the relation between subject and object.” (Varela et al., p. 33).

It should be noted that contemplation-induced loss of self is different from loss of self as evidenced in psychopathology. The former is basic to the sense of felt meaning and purpose in human existence, while the latter reflects the extremity of its collapse (Hunt, 2007). Buddhist notions of selflessness emphasize flexibility in the perception of the self, which leads to eudemonic happiness and optimal functioning (Dambrun and Ricard, 2011). The meditation styles directly aimed at achieving such states are categorized under the “Deconstructive family” (Dahl et al., 2015). These target the implicit belief that the self is static, enduring and unitary, and replacing identification with it by identification with the phenomenon of experiencing itself (Dalai Lama, 1997).

The current article addresses these issues through a neurophenomenological exploration (Lutz et al., 2002; Thompson et al., 2005) of the sense-of-boundaries (SB), the fundamental division of the field of experience to a “self” versus a “world.” By collaborating with a uniquely qualified meditation practitioner (see section “Methods”), the SB experience was volitionally and repeatedly produced as a graded phenomenon, from a normal SB (SB1) to a state where the SB began to dissolve (SB2) and finally to a state where the SB disappeared (SB3), while brain activity was recorded using magnetoencephalogram (MEG). These states were investigated using a first-person approach where in-depth phenomenological interviews were conducted, and the collected data were analyzed using the grounded approach (explained in great detail in Ataria et al., 2015). The phenomenological interview method elicits from interviewees their own descriptions in their own words, “bracketing out” predetermined descriptive categories and concepts (such as Buddhist jargon). In addition, the grounded theory approach considers data with no hypotheses or categories fixed at the outset, staying as close as possible to the data. Through this process, nine categories of experience that diminished during the shifts between the three SB stages were identified. These are presented and discussed in detail in Ataria et al. (2015). The categories are summarized in below. The main conclusions of the phenomenological inquiry were that the SB should be defined in terms of flexibility, rather than location; and that the more flexible the SB, the weaker these phenomenal categories become, some dissolving completely and some maintaining a very weak presence.

The phenomenal categories outlined above map onto theoretical and experimental conceptualizations which have been previously explored by phenomenologists and cognitive neuroscientists. Specifically, we are referring to self-awareness, including its extended/narrative and core/minimal aspects (using Damasio, 2010 and Gallagher, 2000 terminology, respectively). The categories of “time,” “location” and “self” map onto the self-as-object extended self-conceptualization (Damasio, 2010), whereas the core/minimal self-concept has been argued to be composed of the categories of “internal-external,” (Christoff et al., 2011) “agency,” and “ownership” (Gallagher, 2000) and “center” (Zahavi, 2006). The status of the “TTS” and “bodily feelings” categories is less clear (Gallagher, 2000). Though possibly related to the minimal self-concept, they are better understood in terms of Damasio’s (2010) proto-self-concept, conceptualized as primordial feelings of the living body (such as proprioception and kinesthesia), which precede the subjective experience of being a self. The suggested pre-minimal-self-status of the “TTS” and “bodily feelings” agrees with the phenomenal results that these two categories remain, to some degree, even when the SB (as defined by seven of its categories) disappears. The close link between the nine phenomenal categories and the narrative/minimal/selfless modes of awareness are further clarified in the (Section 1.1). As a final point, it is important to keep in mind that the different modes of self-awareness are not mutually exclusive. While not self-specific, SRP (such as the narrative mode) do include also SSPs. Like other conscious mental content produced by the brain, SRP content expressed as thoughts and feelings is stamped with the subjective signature of being our thoughts and feelings. Thus, an encapsulated working model of self-awareness modes has been suggested (Gallagher, 2000; Damasio, 2010; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013) and is adopted here.

These phenomenological insights were “front-loaded” (Gallagher and Sørensen, 2006) onto the experiment’s design and analysis in two ways. First, the gradually descending states of SB guided us toward performing a regression analysis, and thus examining not just differences between two brain states, but differences specifically related to the gradual process of SB dissolution. We thus searched for spatial and oscillatory, sensor and source-level signals which increased or decreased their activity together with the three different SB states. Second, the close phenomenological link between the experience of SB and self-awareness mode allowed testing the neural results on an independent, previously recorded MEG dataset of proficient contemplative practitioners (reported in Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013), who produced in the MEG states of gradually descending self-awareness from an extended narrative sense of self to a minimal sense of self focused on the “here and now,” and finally to a selfless mode of awareness where the sense of ownership disappeared (see section “Methods” for more details). We hypothesized that: (i) The decrease in the SB would correlate with identifiable oscillatory systems in the brain (Stage 1), and that (ii) these would generalize to the meditator group’s data (Stage 2). We used MEG as the study’s research tool as it allows noninvasive but reliable source estimation of fast neural oscillatory rhythms (Hansen et al., 2010).


Methods


Stage 1


Participant

We collaborated with S (third author of this article), a male aged 64, who has been practicing mindfulness according to the Satipatthana and Theravada Vipassana traditions for about 40 years, with over 20 000 accumulated hours. S was chosen for the present study for two reasons: (i) His proven skill (based on five previous phenomenological interviews) in producing on demand unique states of consciousness, sustaining them, describing them in rich detail as they unfold, carrying out reflexive processes without “interfering” with the first-person pre-reflexive experience, and precisely defining the limitations of his descriptions; (ii) His ability to accomplish these feats under experimental conditions. Laboratory settings introduce a set of nontrivial constraints and pressures which can make it difficult even for experienced practitioners to perform as well as they would under optimal conditions. Over the past 10 years, S has been collaborating with neuroscientists in neuroimaging studies using a variety of methodologies including electroencephalogram (EEG) (Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2012), MEG (Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2013; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013), and fMRI (Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2016). Regarding S’s involvement in the study, S’s role in the study was that of a unique subject who generously contributed his time, effort, and unique expertise to the practice, production, and description of the SB states in a manner conducive to neurophenomenological research. He was not involved in the formulation of hypotheses, analysis of the data (phenomenological and neurophysiological), or in the interpretation of the results.


Procedure

Immediately after accepting S's approval, a series of meetings were set up in which the proposed study was introduced, the optimal number of SB states determined, and it was verified that S could produce on demand states corresponding to different levels of SB which were (i) replicable, (ii) differentiated enough, and yet (iii) true to the complexity of the experience, and finally, (iv) open to a high level of description. A phenomenological interview (following the methods described in Petitmengin, 2006 and Vermersch, 2009) took place in the MEG laboratory while lying supine within the scanner with closed eyes—in conditions similar to the subsequent brain recording session. S described his inner experience after meditating as well during the meditation itself. The full interview transcripts are available online as Supplementary Material to Ataria et al. (2015). The experimental design included four blocks, each block consisting of three 1-min conditions of normal SB (SB1), attenuated SB (SB2), and a state in which the SB disappeared completely (SB3). In between blocks there was a 1-min rest period which was not analyzed. The order of conditions remained constant throughout the blocks due to the difficulty in randomly producing the different states. S was cued by prerecorded aural instructions (the words “one,” “two,” “three,” and “rest”) to transition from one state to another. Though S reported he could transit almost instantaneously between states, the first 3 s of each block were not analyzed in order to ensure sufficient time for state stabilization.


MEG data acquisition

MEG recordings were conducted with a whole-head, 248-channel magnetometer array (4D Neuroimaging, Magnes 3600 WH) in a magnetically-shielded room. Reference coils located approximately 30 cm above the head oriented by the x, y, and z axes were used to remove environmental noise. Head position was indicated by attaching 5 coils to the scalp and determining, to a 1 mm resolution, their position relative to the sensor array before and after measurement. Discrepancies of less than 5 mm were measured in each of the five coils. Head shape and coil position were digitized using a Pollhemus FASTTRAK digitizer. Brain signals were recorded with a sample rate of 1017.25 Hz and an analog online 0.1–400 Hz band-pass filter. The instructions for each condition were presented using E-prime 2.0 and delivered via a STAX SRS-005 amplifier and SR-003 push-pull electrostatic earspeakers coupled with a vinyl tube to silicon earpieces to prevent magnetic noise within the shielded room.


Cleaning and preprocessing

Data processing and analysis was performed using Matlab®R2009b and FieldTrip toolbox for MEG analysis (Open Source Software for Advanced Analysis of MEG, Oostenveld et al., 2011). Data were cleaned for line frequency (by recording on an additional channel the 50 Hz from the power outlet, and subtracting the average power-line response from every MEG sensor), building vibration (measured in x, y, and z directions using three Bruel and Kjaer accelerometers), and heartbeat artifacts using the methods described in Tal and Abeles (2013). One malfunctioning MEG sensor was identified and its data were removed from further analysis. The data were segmented into nonoverlapping 2-s epochs, which were visually examined for muscle and jump (in the MEG sensors) artifacts. Contaminated epochs were removed from further analysis. To ensure the removal of all heartbeat, eye, and muscle artifact, an independent component analysis (ICA) was performed on the data (Jung et al., 2000). Segmented data were down-sampled to 300 Hz to speed up data decomposition. The data were then decomposed into a set of independent components (247, as the number of remaining sensors) ordered by degree of their explained variance. Components indicating heartbeats or eye movements were determined by visual inspection of the 2D scalp maps and time course of each component. Two components were taken out, and the resultant unmixing matrix was used to compute the time-courses of the data in its original high-temporal resolution.


Sensor space analysis

A whole-head frequency analysis for low (2–40 Hz) and high (40–90 Hz) frequencies at 1 Hz resolution was performed. For each 2-s epoch in each sensor, a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with a Hanning taper was applied to overlapping fixed-length sliding time windows (every 50 ms), which were then averaged, yielding one value per sensor, epoch, and frequency. Fixed-time windows of different lengths as well as different degrees of spectral smoothing were used for low and high frequencies: 0.5 s and 2 Hz smoothing for 2–40 Hz, and 0.2 s and 14 Hz smoothing for 40–90 Hz (Gross et al., 2013).

For determining frequency-specific neural activity related to the gradual decrease in the sense of boundaries (SB), the epochs were grouped into the three conditions outlined previously (SB1, SB2, SB3) and subjected to a regression analysis, yielding a regression coefficient t-statistic. This procedure was performed independently (over sensors/frequencies) in two stages (see Levy et al., 2013; Van Der Werf et al., 2010 for a similar analysis strategy): initially, after averaging over all the sensors, thus determining frequency of interest (FOI). Statistical results of this stage were corrected for multiple comparisons by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Once statistically significant FOI’s were determined, the regression procedure was performed for each sensor individually averaged over the FOI, thus determining the sensors of interest (SOI) driving the FOI effects. Statistics were assessed using a cluster-based nonparametric permutation approach on pooled regression t-values (Maris and Oostenveld, 2007). Finally, the results were collapsed across the SOI within the FOI range to yield one value per trial per condition, and post hoc t-tests were conducted and Bonferroni corrected.

One drawback of the study’s setup is that the order of the SB states was fixed. This design was adopted as a completely random ordering of conditions introduces further difficulty in producing the SB states. However, as in each of the four blocks, SB1 preceded SB2 which preceded SB3, it could be argued that regression results could be due to temporal order and not due to the nature of the SB states themselves. In order to rule out such an explanation, the data was regrouped into conditions based on temporal order alone (order of presentation), and an identical regression analysis was performed on the newly-grouped data (see in Section 2.1.1). For ascertaining that the reported power changes were indeed increases/decreases in power rather than reflecting a return to equilibrium, an additional control measure was implemented. The 1-min rest periods in each block were used for baseline correction of the SB data (see Supplementary Section 2.1.2 and).


Source space analysis

Neuronal sources which could account for the significant sensor-level results were estimated using an adaptive spatial filtering method (beamforming, Gross et al., 2001), relying on partial canonical correlations. Spatial filters optimally pass activity from the location of interest, while suppressing activity from other locations. The subject's brain volume was divided into a regular 1 cm grid and aligned to a template brain (Montreal Neurological Institute, MNI), with the positions determined by linear transformation from an equally sized canonical grid based on the template brain. Lead field matrices were computed using a single-shell volume conduction model (Nolte, 2003) based on the manually-digitized headshape. This process was performed with matlab scripts using SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm, last accessed 9 March 2016).

Fourier transforms of the tapered data epochs were computed for the frequency bin that yielded the most extreme t-value in the sensor analysis, using a Hanning window and 4 Hz spectral smoothing. Spatial filters were then constructed for each grid location (using all three conditions), and the data were projected through the spatial filters and log-transformed. This procedure yielded source-level power estimates for each epoch, condition, and voxel. The data in each voxel were then subjected to the same statistical regression analysis performed at the sensor level, and the whole-head image was again corrected for multiple comparisons using cluster-based permutations. For the purpose of using the visualization options and anatomical atlases afforded by the AFNI-SUMA software (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni, last accessed 9 March 2016), the final statistical images were transformed to Talairach space (Talairach and Tournoux, 1988).


Stage 2


Setup

The participant group consisted of 12 right-handed long-term mindfulness meditators (9 males and 3 females, mean age 45.2, averaging over 16 years and 11 000 h of formal practice). This group included S as it was part of a larger experiment containing tasks unrelated to the ones reported here (some of them reported in Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2013; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013). S’s data, however, was not analyzed to avoid confirmation circularity. Here we used the latter dataset but implemented a novel analysis procedure, matching the current study’s aims. The purpose of the previous study (Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013) was to outline the differential spatial and spectral mechanisms mediating narrative versus minimal modes of self-awareness. The current analysis set out to partially validate Stage 1 results on an independent group of meditators by determining whether the hypothesized brain mechanisms (regions and frequency bands) were indeed correlated with the subjective attenuation of self-awareness.

As part of the experimental procedure, the participants were requested via aural prerecorded instructions to produce, volitionally, three modes of awareness for 30 s, three times for each state with their eyes closed. The first mode was “narrative” (operationalized as “try to think what characterizes you”), defined as a mode of self-awareness weaving episodic memory, future planning, and self-evaluation together with a coherent self-narrative and identity; the second was “minimal” (operationalized as “Try to experience what is happening to you at the present moment”), a minimal mode of self-awareness focused on present momentary experience and closely tied to the sense of agency and ownership (Gallagher, 2000); and the third was “selfless” (operationalized as “Try to experience what is happening at the present moment, when you are not in the center”), a mode of awareness defined by and practiced within Buddhist contemplative traditions, in which identification with a static self is replaced by identification with the phenomenon of experiencing itself (Dalai Lama, 1997). As this mode of awareness may be alien to readers unfamiliar with meditation experience, we supply below two of the meditators’ experience reports: sub12: “It was emptiness, as if the self fell out of the picture. There was an experience but it had no address, it was not attached to a center or subject. It was not 100%, but there was no sense of an object there running the show.”; and sub14: “It was to be aware of the body, the sensations, pulse, location of limbs, sounds and sights—to be only a witness to all this.”

Throughout the successive volitional shift of the sense of self between the three modes, MEG was recorded. Online as well post-experiment retrospective data were collected including measures of task success and stability. The online measure was a 1–3 (3 meaning no success) rating of task performance success after each 30-s epoch (triggered by a bell sound with 3 indicating no success). No scores of 3 were recorded. The retrospective measures were collected outside the MEG after the experiment. The scores were high: an average of 8.13 and 7.93 (on a 1–10 scale) for success and stability, and were not significantly different across the narrative, minimal, and selfless conditions (for further details, see Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013). Regarding first-person data, as talking during MEG recording may cause movement artifacts, the collected phenomenological descriptions were limited to the selfless state which was the last state produced. Immediately after participants produced this state, the MEG recording stopped and first-person descriptions were collected.


Analysis and statistics

The details regarding MEG data collection, cleaning, and preprocessing are similar to what has been described in Stage 1. The data of one subject could not be analyzed due to a volume alignment problem. The data of the remaining 10 subjects were analyzed in two stages: First, we checked whether significant regression values were present for the delta (1–4 Hz), theta (5–7 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (14–30 Hz), low gamma (31–50 Hz), and high gamma (51–90 Hz) frequency bands. This was done by averaging over all sensors for each subject and then conducting a one-sample t-test of the pooled group results against the null hypothesis that the distribution would have a zero mean. We hypothesized that significant frequency band/s would match those found in Stage 1. In order to control for carry over effects possibly resulting from the lack of counterbalancing or randomization of the trial/block type, the same analysis was performed on two other conditions (related to the sense of “time” and “space”) which were identical in design (three states, each state produced for 3 x 30 s, see for more detail). We hypothesized that here the significant frequency band/s would not match those found in Stage 1.

In the second stage, source localization was carried out in a similar manner to the one described in Stage 1. For facilitating a group analysis, all brain volumes were aligned to the same template brain detailed in the “Methods” section, thus creating a common anatomical space on which group statistics could be performed. Source estimation was computed on the peak frequency within the determined frequency band of interest from the Stage 2 group data. In addition, a one sample t-test of the Stage 2 group results against subject S’s results from Stage 1 was conducted in order to highlight differences in terms of the effects’ spatial overlap extent. Given that subject S is such a highly-skilled practitioner, we hypothesized that the effects found for S would also be more pronounced relative to the other meditators. Statistics were assessed using a cluster-based nonparametric permutation approach on pooled regression t-values (Maris and Oostenveld, 2007).


Results


Stage 1


Sensor space

Averaging overall channels, the regression analysis indicated significant negative regression coefficient values in the beta band (marked by red circles), peaking at 27 Hz. No positive regression values were found in any of the frequency bands. In addition, regrouping of the conditions by order of presentation did not change the reported findings, thus partially controlling for the fixed order of SB states production and ruling out the possibility that the results could be explained by their temporal ordering alone. In addition, the baselining of the data using the 1-min rest period in each block did not change the results meaningfully, suggesting the results reflect decreases in beta band power (rather than a return to equilibrium).

The significant frequencies (22–33 Hz) were defined as FOI, interpreted as a beta band effect. While frequencies greater than 30 Hz are often interpreted as indicating the gamma band, the present data set suggests a beta band label to be more adequate. As can be seen in, immediately after the 27 Hz peak, there is a sharp decrease in regression significance which continues and is maintained throughout the gamma band. In addition, significant peaks are present also in lower beta frequencies (16–18 Hz). These suggest that the spill into the higher frequencies reflects spectral leakage. Finally, the Stage 2 results (see section “Sensor space”), defined using a standard band definition (14–30 Hz), implicate the beta band (and only the beta band), further strengthening beta band interpretation of the results.

Subsequently, the effect’s spatial topography was examined. The spatial topography driving the beta band effect is presented in, with significant sensors marked with bold stars. As can be seen the effect is pronounced over bilateral frontal and central sites. shows the respective decrease in beta power percent in signal change (PSC) over these sensors; and shows the overall statistical regression map. The mean power values over significant bands and sensors were averaged and subjected to a post hoc analysis.


Source space

The sources of the significant beta band regression for subject S are presented in, and further anatomical detail of the images is supplied in. In line with the sensor space data, only negative regression values were found. The results indicate a large widespread cluster of voxels manifesting over lateral (top images) and medial (bottom images) parietal regions, more extensively in the right hemisphere (right images). On the lateral surface of both hemispheres, the regions comprising the TPJ, namely, the inferior parietal lobule (IPL), supramarginal gyrus (SMG), angular gyrus (AG), superior temporal gyrus (STG), and middle temporal gyrus (MTG) are the main loci of the regression effect. In addition, the effect extends to primary sensory and motor regions and insular regions. On the medial surface, the precuneus (Prc) and middle/posterior cingulate gyrus bilaterally (M/PCC), as well as the supplementary motor area (SMA) in the right hemisphere also evidenced significant regression values.


Stage 2


Sensor space

The regression analyses over all sensors for the delta, theta, alpha, beta, low and high gamma bands yielded significant negative regression coefficient values in the beta band alone [T (1, 9) = −3.91, P < 0.0036 (0.018 after Bonferroni correction)], with the peak frequency at 21 Hz. The other frequency bands did not exhibit significant values (even before the Bonferroni correction). In addition, the regression analyses of the control “time” and “space” blocks in the beta band did not yield significant results, suggesting that the reported beta band effect could not be attributed to the fixed order of the blocks.


Source space

The sources of the significant beta band regression for the group-level analysis (n = 10), masked by S’s ROI’s, are presented in, and further anatomical details of the images are supplied in Table 3. Again, only negative regression coefficients were found. The findings indicate a large right hemisphere cluster peaking in the AG. The majority of the cluster is comprised of right TPJ regions (IPL, SMG, AG and STG; B1 in), with weaker and smaller extensions to the pre- and postcentral gyrus, and the insula and inferior frontal gyrus. On the medial surface, the cingulate cortex (M/PCC) and the precuneus (Prc) also evidenced significant regression values (B2 in), though much smaller than those in S’s data.

(in Supplementary Section 3.1) presents the source images of the one-sample t-test between S and the meditators’ group (n = 10) regression coefficients. These largely overlap with S’s results, in line with S being a uniquely skilled practitioner. In addition, Supplementary Fig. S5 presents the unmasked (by S’s ROI) group results. These reveal additional occipital and right frontal lateral regions which evidence significant beta band regression effects, interpreted as indicating increased attentional resource allocation for producing the deeper meditative SB states (Saggar et al., 2012; see, Section 3.1 for a more detailed discussion).


Discussion

The current study is the first to directly and ecologically tap SSPs, allowing uniquely-trained abilities and phenomenology to guide neuroscientific design and analysis. Together with our previous publication (Ataria et al., 2015), we demonstrate the graded rather than all-or-nothing nature of SSPs on both the experiential and neural levels. Our current results highlight two important findings regarding the neural mechanisms of SSPs. First, we demonstrated that beta oscillations are part of the neural processes associated with changes in the SB. Second, we showed that these modulations can be localized to mainly two anatomical regions in the lateral and medial parietal brain.

The TPJ region was the largest and most pronounced. The TPJ has been shown to play a significant role in self-related paradigms such as self-location (Ionta et al., 2011; Lenggenhager et al., 2011; Blanke, 2012; Guterstam et al., 2015), self-awareness as part of the default mode network (Northoff et al., 2006; Buckner et al., 2008), agency and ownership (Farrer and Frith, 2002; Farrer et al., 2003, Tsakiris et al., 2010; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013; Kühn, et al., 2013; Chambon et al., 2014; Khalighinejad and Haggard, 2015), egocentric perspective (Creem et al., 2001; Wraga et al., 2005; Easton et al, 2009) and first-person perspective taking (Ruby and Decety, 2001; Vogeley et al., 2004; Ionta et al., 2011). In addition, the literature on out-of-body experiences (OBE), where the unity of self and body is disrupted, and in particular studies where such experiences are produced using full-body illusions (Blanke and Metzinger, 2009), have been linked to the constructs of self-location, agency and ownership, egocentric/first-person perspective, as well as to the TPJ (Blanke et al., 2002; Blanke, 2005a, 2005b; Arzy et al., 2006; Ridder et al., 2007). The right lateralization of the results is aligned with the literature, as lesions leading to OBEs are usually to be found in right parietal regions (Ionta et al., 2011). In addition, studies of multisensory integration of bodily self-awareness (Blanke, 2005b; Arzy et al., 2006; Ionta et al, 2014), and the sense of agency (Ruby and Decety, 2001; Farrer et al., 2003; Decety and Lamm, 2007), report effects either more pronounced, or limited to, the right hemisphere.

On the medial surface, the highlighted MPC region is a well-established region mediating self-awareness, reaching back to the original studies of the default mode network (Raichle et al., 2001), and supported by large-scale quantitative meta-analyses of brain imaging studies on self-processing (Northoff et al., 2006; Buckner et al., 2008; Schneider et al., 2008; Kim, 2012). Within the self-network, while the medial prefrontal regions were shown to be involved in self-evaluation (Kwan et al., 2007; Luber et al., 2012), the medial parietal region has been suggested to code for the integration of self-referential stimuli within the context of one’s own person (Lou et al., 2004; Northoff and Bermpohl, 2004), and for the experience of self-identification (Brewer et al., 2013; Garrison et al., 2013; Josipovic, 2013). In addition, the MPC was found to play a major role in studies directly relevant to minimal self-processing, but coming from diverse directions, including fMRI neuroimaging (Araujo et al., 2015), neurophenomenology (Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013), minimally-conscious patients (Laureys et al., 2004), lesion patient studies (Philippi et al., 2012), as well as brain synchrony (Lou et al., 2010).

We interpret these findings as indicative of two concurrent neurofunctional processes which give rise to the experience of diminished SB. The first is freeing conscious awareness from its habitual identification with a self via suppression of the integrative aspect of the self-network in the MPC. The second is a disruption of the self-body unity allowing awareness a measure of flexibility regarding its habitually perceived egocentric location and perspective. Enacting only the former process may result in an OBE type of experience where a spatial shift in the sense of self is induced (Ionta et al., 2011; Blanke, 2012). However, in such cases, the sense of there being a self versus world does not change, only the boundaries are remapped. In other words, the brain maintains its habitual tendency of enacting SSPs and separating the field of experience into self/nonself.

The current setup does not allow inferring causality; however, there is evidence that the MPC can be trained to decrease its activity, as reported in long-term meditators (Brefczynski-Lewis et al., 2007; Brewer et al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2011; Pagnoni, 2012; Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2013; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013; Marzetti et al., 2014). This suggests that the volitional attenuation of the MPC is a mechanistic target of mindfulness meditation (Brewer and Garrison, 2014). Relying on phenomenological and fMRI data, Josipovic (2013) suggested that the MPC is significantly involved in modulating the fragmentation of experience into subjective versus objective, or self versus other, in meditators. Neurophysiological results tie such states, though not exclusively, to beta band cortical desynchronization (Lehmann et al., 2012; Saggar et al., 2012; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013; Hinterberger et al., 2014; Hauswald et al., 2015).

The current results indicate that the beta band is associated with modulating SSPs. It has been suggested, based on converging evidence from studies of the motor system and related pathophysiology as well as top-down mechanisms involved in cognitive and perceptual processing, that beta band activity (BBA) is related to the maintenance of the current motor/cognitive set. Thus, enhanced BBA signals the intention or prediction of maintaining the status quo while suppression of BBA is argued to signal the opposite—the intention and prediction for disruption of the status quo (Engel and Fries, 2010). Applying this hypothesis to the current study, one’s normal, default SSPs gives rise to a natural and powerful subjective state of SB that is rarely perturbed. The SB stems from early constantly adapting evolutionary needs (Llinás, 2001; Damasio, 2010), and as such, involves primitive neural mappings which can be argued to constitute the lowest level of subjective experience and indeed consciousness (Damasio and Carvalho, 2013). Consequently, volitionally manipulating this powerfully implanted SB and producing attenuated and even null states of SB would constitute a gross disruption of the habitual cognitive-experiential status quo, and would thus, necessitate a marked reduction in BBA.

The graded nature of SSPs and its trainability leading to the loss of the distinction between “self” and “world” point to a self which is constructed and continuously remade by particular and transient neural processes. That the self is a unitary entity only in the phenomenal sense is an idea which is not alien to the neurocognitive literature. It has been discussed already by William James in the chapter “Consciousness of Self” in his “Principles of Psychology” (James, 1890), and is the topic of numerous current books authored by influential neuroscientists, psychologists, and philosophers (e.g., Llinás, 2001; Metzinger, 2004; Damasio, 2010; Hood, 2012; Harris, 2014). This view of transient selfhood is aligned with the view held by Eastern meditative traditions (see Ganeri, 2012; Thompson, 2015 for an in-depth discussion), and Buddhist ones in particular, which have long claimed that the self is entirely a constructed habit, a mental content, a dominant thought, and not a reality (Dalai Lama, 1997; Ekman et al., 2005; Nydahl, 2008; Austin, 2009). In these traditions, the conceptualization as well as actual experience of reality beyond duality is immensely important (Dunne, 2011; Josipovic, 2013). This understanding remains central in the current widespread theory and practice of mindfulness, a current Buddhist development (Williams and Kabat-Zinn, 2011), and holds a central position in scientific neuropsychological conceptualizations of mindfulness (Lutz et al., 2007; Holzel et al., 2011; Vago and Silbersweig, 2012; Baird et al., 2014; Dahl et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2015). Highly-accomplished mindfulness meditators, through years of long practice, encounter, become familiar with and gain intimate knowledge of states where the self–world separation dissolves, giving rise to a non-dual awareness. Thus, they may develop the abilities to volitionally manipulate such states on demand and even under experimental settings, such as while being scanned by brain imaging devices (Lutz et al., 2004; Josipovic et al., 2011; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013). This fact reinforces Varela’s (1996) suggestion of using meditators as neurophenomenological subjects, in particular regarding themes concerning the self.

The distinct neural characterization and plasticity of SSPs may hold practical value for clinical populations suffering from abnormal SB. For example, during trauma, an involuntary shift from the regular daily experience to a sense of rigid and closed SB may be enacted as a defense mechanism (Ataria, 2013). In addition, depersonalization disorder (DPD) is characterized by a sense of unreality about the self and the world, and thus directly reflects a disturbed mode of SSP (Sierra and David, 2011). Gray matter changes in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes (both lateral and medial) are associated with DPD (Sierra et al., 2014), as well as hyperactivation of the TPJ (Simeon et al., 2000). Finally, preliminary studies suggest that noninvasive stimulation of the right TPJ may be a therapeutic option for DPD. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation over the course of weeks in DPD patients resulted in an impressive reduction of symptoms in about half of the patients (Mantovani et al., 2011). The present study’s novel contribution in highlighting the associated frequency band and electrodes' spatial location may further aid clinicians both in early detection of SSPs’ abnormalities, as well as the design of neurofeedback interventions (Bagdasaryan and Quyen, 2013), in particular, interventions utilizing immersive virtual reality environments which allow ecologically relevant learning (Gruzelier et al., 2010).

The current study suffers from a number of drawbacks. The first is the study’s design which lacked randomization in the ordering of conditions. Attempts were made to control for this flaw (see section “Methods,” “Sensor space analysis,” and “Analysis and statistics”; and Sections 2.1 and 2.2), which was largely due to the neurophenomenological nature of the study which imposed certain restrictions both in terms of facilitating the production of these rare states, as well as the requirements of phenomenological data collection. As the concepts and processes engaged with are difficult to operationalize, and similar studies are scarce, refining methodology is a task for future experimentation. A further drawback is that the prior neural hypothesis is based on a single subject. While this drawback was partly overcome by corroborating the results in a larger group, the degree to which the results can be generalized to wider, non-meditative populations is uncertain. As such, the study is preliminary. In addition, the study’s setup does not support inferring causality (that the modulation of beta oscillations causes changes in the SB). We cannot completely rule out the possibility that the reported changes may be due to downstream effects of other processes, or could be purely epiphenomenal. Nevertheless, despite these limitations, this proof-of-concept study illustrates that studying subtle but profound aspects of self-identity is tenable by incorporating first-person data into neuroimaging experimental protocols. We hope it will spark further robust examination of the brain mechanisms, trainability, and clinical applicability of SSPs.


HMeta-d: hierarchical Bayesian estimation of metacognitive efficiency from confidence ratings

Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2017. PMC5858026, CC BY 4.0.

Metacognition refers to the ability to reflect on and monitor one’s cognitive processes, such as perception, memory and decision-making. Metacognition is often assessed in the lab by whether an observer’s confidence ratings are predictive of objective success, but simple correlations between performance and confidence are susceptible to undesirable influences such as response biases. Recently, an alternative approach to measuring metacognition has been developed (Maniscalco and Lau 2012) that characterizes metacognitive sensitivity (meta-d') by assuming a generative model of confidence within the framework of signal detection theory. However, current estimation routines require an abundance of confidence rating data to recover robust parameters, and only provide point estimates of meta-d’. In contrast, hierarchical Bayesian estimation methods provide opportunities to enhance statistical power, incorporate uncertainty in group-level parameter estimates and avoid edge-correction confounds. Here I introduce such a method for estimating metacognitive efficiency (meta-d’/d’) from confidence ratings and demonstrate its application for assessing group differences. A tutorial is provided on both the meta-d’ model and the preparation of behavioural data for model fitting. Through numerical simulations I show that a hierarchical approach outperforms alternative fitting methods in situations where limited data are available, such as when quantifying metacognition in patient populations. In addition, the model may be flexibly expanded to estimate parameters encoding other influences on metacognitive efficiency. MATLAB software and documentation for implementing hierarchical meta-d’ estimation (HMeta-d) can be downloaded at https://github.com/smfleming/HMeta-d.


Introduction

Metacognition is defined as ‘knowledge of one’s own cognitive processes’ (Flavell 1979). For example, we can reflect on whether a particular percept is accurate or inaccurate, and this ability to ‘know that we know’ is a central aspect of conscious experience (Schooler 2002). Consider blindsight, a neurological condition that sometimes arises following selective lesions to primary visual cortex (Weiskrantz et al. 1974). A blindsight patient may perform a task (e.g. discriminating the location of a stimulus) at a reasonably high level in the otherwise blind field, and yet lack insight as to whether they have performed accurately on any given trial (Persaud et al. 2007). It is plausible that a joint lack of metacognition and conscious visual experience are both consequences of disruptions to higher-order representations (Lau and Rosenthal 2011; Ko and Lau 2012). While there are clearly other drivers of confidence in one’s task performance aside from sensory uncertainty (such as response requirements; Pouget et al. 2016; Denison 2017), understanding the mechanisms supporting metacognition may shed light on the putative underpinnings of conscious experience. Understanding the relationship between metacognition and perceptual and cognitive processes also has broader application in work on judgment and decision-making (Lichtenstein et al. 1982), developmental psychology (Weil et al. 2013; Goupil et al. 2016), social psychology (Heatherton 2011) and clinical disorders (David et al. 2012; Moeller and Goldstein 2014).

Metacognitive ‘sensitivity’ can be assessed by the extent to which an observer’s confidence ratings are predictive of their actual success. Consider a simple decision task such as whether a briefly flashed visual stimulus is categorized as being tilted to the left or right, followed by a confidence rating in being correct. The task of assessing response accuracy using confidence ratings is often called the ‘type 2 task’ (Clarke et al. 1959; Galvin et al. 2003) to differentiate it from the ‘type 1 task’ of discriminating between states of the world (e.g. left or right tilts). If higher confidence ratings are given after correct judgments and lower confidence ratings after incorrect judgments, we can ascribe high metacognitive sensitivity to the subject. Thus a simple and intuitive way of assessing metacognitive sensitivity is to correlate confidence with accuracy (Nelson 1984).

However, confidence–accuracy correlations (e.g. gamma and phi correlations) are affected by the confounding factors of type 1 performance (d’) and type 2 response bias (overall level of confidence; Masson and Rotello 2009; Fleming and Lau 2014). Consider two subjects A and B performing the same task but with different baseline levels of performance. A and B may have the same underlying metacognitive ability, but their confidence–accuracy correlations may differ due to differing performance levels. In this situation, we may erroneously conclude that A and B have different metacognition, despite their underlying metacognitive ability being equal. More generally, an important lesson from the signal detection theory (SDT) approach to modelling type 1 and type 2 tasks is that type 1 sensitivity (d’) and type 1 criterion (c) influence measures of type 2 sensitivity (Galvin et al. 2003).

Recently, an alternative approach to measuring metacognitive sensitivity has been developed by Maniscalco and Lau (2012). This approach posits a generative model of confidence reports within the framework of SDT. Fitting the model to data returns a parameter, meta-d’, that reflects an individual’s metacognitive sensitivity. Specifically, meta-d’ is the value of type 1 performance (d’) that would have been predicted to give rise to the observed confidence rating data assuming an ideal observer with type 1 d’ = meta-d’. Meta-d’ can then be compared with actual d’ and a relative measure of metacognitive sensitivity can then be calculated as a ratio (meta-d’/d’) or subtraction (meta-d’-d’). Meta-d’/d’ is a measure of ‘metacognitive efficiency’—given a particular level of task performance, how efficient is the individual’s metacognition? If meta-d’ = d’, then the observer is metacognitively ‘ideal’, using all the information available for the type 1 task when reporting type 2 confidence. However, we might find that meta-d’ < d’, due to some degree of noise or imprecision introduced when rating one’s confidence. Conversely we may find that meta-d’ > d’ if subjects are able to draw on additional information such as hunches (Rausch and Zehetleitner 2016; Scott et al. 2014) further processing of stimulus information (Rabbitt and Vyas 1981; Charles et al. 2013) or knowledge of other influences on task performance when making their metacognitive judgments (Fleming and Daw 2017).

The properties of the meta-d’ model have been thoroughly explored in previous articles (Maniscalco and Lau 2012; Barrett et al. 2013; Fleming and Lau 2014;Maniscalco and Lau 2014). The goal of the present article is 2-fold. First, I introduce a new method for estimating meta-d’/d’ from confidence ratings using hierarchical Bayes, and provide a tutorial on its usage. Second, I demonstrate the benefits of applying this method to derive group-level estimates of metacognitive efficiency in situations where data are limited.

Previously meta-d’ has been fitted using gradient descent on the likelihood [maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)], sum-of-squared error (SSE) or using analytic approximation (Maniscalco and Lau 2012; Barrett et al. 2013). However, several factors make a Bayesian approach attractive for typical metacognition studies: Point estimates of meta-d’ are inevitably noisy. Several parameters must be estimated in the signal detection model, including multiple type 2 criteria [specifically, where = number of confidence ratings available]. One common issue in cognitive neuroscience is that trial numbers per condition are also low (e.g. in patient studies, or tasks conducted in conjunction with neuroimaging), and frequentist estimates of hit and false-alarm rates fail to account for uncertainty about these rates that is a consequence of finite data. A Bayesian analysis incorporates such uncertainty into parameter estimates.A hierarchical Bayesian approach is the correct way to combine information about within- and between-subject uncertainty. In a typical study, the metacognitive sensitivities of two groups (e.g. patients and controls) are compared. Single-subject maximum likelihood fits are carried out, and the fitted meta-d’ parameters are entered into an independent samples t-test. Any information about the uncertainty in each subject’s parameter fits is discarded in this procedure. In contrast, using hierarchical Bayes, information about uncertainty is retained, such that group-level parameters are less influenced by single-subject fits that have a high degree of uncertainty. In turn, hierarchical model fits are able to capitalize on the statistical strength offered by the degree to which subjects are similar with respect to one or more model parameters, mutually constraining the subject-level model fits.In fitting SDT models to data, padding (edge correction) is often applied to avoid zero counts of confidence ratings in particular cells [e.g. high confidence error trials; Hautus (1995); Macmillan and Creelman (2005)]. This padding may bias subject-specific parameter estimates particularly when the overall trial number is low. A Bayesian approach avoids the need for edge correction as the generative multinomial model naturally handles zero cell counts, and a hierarchical specification pools data over subjects (Lee 2008).A hierarchical model makes testing group-level hypotheses natural and straightforward. For example, say we are interested in testing whether a particular patient group has lower metacognitive sensitivity compared with controls. Hierarchical Bayes allows us to directly estimate the posterior distribution of a parameter that characterizes the differences between groups, and provides a principled framework for hypothesis testing. Finally, a Bayesian framework for cognitive modelling enjoys other advantages that have been outlined in detailed elsewhere (Kruschke 2014; Lee and Wagenmakers 2014). Briefly, they include the ability to gain evidence in favour of the null hypothesis as well as against it; the ability to combine prior information (e.g. a prior on the distribution of metacognitive sensitivity in a healthy population) with new data; and the flexible extension of the model to estimate subject- and trial-level influences on metacognition.

The basics of Bayesian estimation of cognitive models are intuitive. First, prior information is specified in the form of probability distributions over model parameters, and observed data are used to update beliefs to construct a posterior distribution or belief in a particular parameter. The ‘hierarchical’ component of hierarchical Bayes simply indicates that multiple instances of a particular parameter (e.g. across different subjects) are estimated in the same model. The development of efficient sampling routines for arbitrary models such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), their inclusion in freely available software packages such as JAGS (http://mcmc-jags.sourceforge.net; last accessed 31st August 2016) and STAN (http://mc-stan.org; last accessed 31st August 2016) and advances in computing power means that Bayesian estimation of arbitrary models is now straightforward to implement in practice (Kruschke 2014).

In this article, I briefly introduce the meta-d’ model and its hierarchical Bayesian variant [further details of the model can be found in the Appendix and in Maniscalco and Lau (2014)]. I then provide a step-by-step MATLAB tutorial for fitting meta-d’ to single-subject and group data. Finally, I conduct parameter recovery simulations to compare hierarchical Bayesian and standard estimation routines. These results show that, particularly when data are limited, the new HMeta-d method outperforms traditional fitting procedures and provides appropriate control over false positives. Model code and examples are freely available online at https://github.com/smfleming/HMeta-d (last accessed 4th January 2017).


Methods


Outline of the meta-d’ model

The meta-d’ model is summarized in graphical form in. The raw data for the model fit is the observed distribution of confidence ratings conditional on whether a decision is correct or incorrect. Intuitively, if a subject has greater metacognitive sensitivity, they are able to monitor their decision performance by providing higher confidence ratings when they are correct, and lower ratings when incorrect, and these distributions will only weakly overlap (solid lines). Conversely, a subject with poorer metacognitive sensitivity will show greater overlap between these distributions (dotted lines). The overlap between distributions can be calculated through type 2 receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The conditional probability P(confidence = y | accuracy) is calculated for each confidence level; cumulating these conditional probabilities and plotting them against each other produces the type 2 ROC function. A type 2 ROC that bows sharply upwards indicates a high degree of sensitivity to correct/incorrect decisions; a type 2 ROC closer to the major diagonal indicates weaker metacognitive sensitivity.

The area under the type 2 ROC (AUROC2) is itself a useful non-parametric measure of metacognitive sensitivity, indicating how well an observer’s ratings discriminate between correct and incorrect decisions. However, as outlined in the introduction, AUROC2 is affected by type 1 performance. In other words, a change in task performance (d’ or criterion) is expected, a priori, to lead to changes in AUROC2 despite endogenous metacognitive efficiency remaining unchanged. By explicitly modelling the connection between performance and metacognition we can appropriately handle this confound. The core idea behind the meta-d’ approach is that a single theoretical type 2 ROC is completely determined by an equal-variance Gaussian SDT model with parameters d’, criterion c and confidence criteria c2 (the arrow going from left to right in). The converse is therefore also true: an observed type 2 ROC implies a particular type 1 d’ (the arrow going from right to left in), conditional on fixing the type 1 criterion c, which in the meta-d’ model is typically set to the observed value. We can then invert the model to determine the type 1 d’ that best fits the observed confidence rating data. As this pseudo-d’ is fit only to confidence rating data, and not the subject’s decisions, we label it meta-d’. Meta-d’ can be directly compared with the type 1 d’ calculated from the subject’s decisions—if meta-d’ is equal to d’, then the subject approximates the ideal SDT prediction of metacognitive sensitivity. The relative values of d’ and meta-d’ thus quantify the relative sensitivity of decisions and confidence ratings respectively. A ratio of these quantities (meta-d’/d’) provides a summary measure of ‘metacognitive efficiency’.

provides a concrete example. The data in both panels are simulated from a SDT model with d’ = 2 and symmetric flanking confidence criteria positioned such that stronger internal signals lead to higher confidence ratings on a 1–4 scale. The y-axis plots the conditional probability of a particular rating given the first-order response is correct (green) or incorrect (red). In both panels, the simulations return higher confidence ratings more often on correct trials and lower confidence more often on incorrect trials. However, in the right-hand panel, Gaussian noise has been added to the internal state underpinning the confidence rating (but not the decision). This leads to a blurring of the correct/incorrect distributions, such that higher confidence ratings are used even when the decision is incorrect. The open circles show fits of the meta-d’ model to each simulated dataset. While both fits return type 1 d’ values of 2.0, the meta-d’ value in the right-hand panel is much lower than on the left, leading to a meta-d’/d’ ratio of ∼64% of optimal. Notably meta-d’ in the left panel is similar to d’, as expected if confidence ratings are generated from an ideal observer model without any additional noise. This example illustrates how meta-d’ can appropriately recover changes in the fidelity of confidence ratings independently of changes in performance.


Single-subject optimization of meta-d’

I first briefly review the standard meta-d’ model and the maximum likelihood method for obtaining single-subject parameter estimates. The model contains free parameters for meta-d’ and the positions of the confidence criteria, where k = number of confidence ratings available. These criteria are response-conditional, with k − 1 criteria following an S1 response and k − 1 criteria following an S2 response. The raw data comprise counts of confidence ratings conditional on both the stimulus category (S1 or S2) and the response (S1 or S2). Type 1 criterion c and sensitivity d’ are estimated from the data using standard formulae (Macmillan and Creelman 2005) (In HMeta-d there is also a user option for jointly estimating both d’ and meta-d’ in a hierarchical framework).

The fitting of meta-d’ rests on calculating the likelihood of the confidence rating data given a particular type 2 ROC generated by systematic variation of type 1 SDT parameters d’ and c, and type 2 criteria c2. By convention, the prefix ‘meta-’ is added to each type 1 SDT parameter to indicate that the parameter is being used to fit type 2 ROC curves. Thus, the type 1 SDT parameters d’, c and c2, when used to characterize type 2 ROC curves, are named meta-d’, meta-c and meta-c2. Describing the observed type 2 ROC in terms of these type 1 SDT parameters underpins the meta-d’ model.

The Appendix contains equations for deriving type 2 probabilities from the type 1 SDT model for both S1 and S2 responses. Given a particular setting of the parameters meta-d’, meta-c and meta-c2 these equations specify a multinomial probability distribution over observed confidence counts. The likelihood of the type 2 confidence data for a particular setting of parameters can be characterized using the multinomial model as:

Best-fitting parameters are then obtained by finding parameter settings that maximize the likelihood of the data: where is a Boolean function which returns a value of ‘true’ only if the type 1 and type 2 criteria stand in appropriate ordinal relationships, i.e. each element in is at least as large as the previous element, and c' is a measure of type 1 response bias.


Hierarchical Bayesian estimation of meta-d’

In hierarchical Bayesian estimation of meta-d’ (HMeta-d), the model is similar except group-level prior densities are specified over each of the subject-level parameters referred to in the previous section. A further difference between HMeta-d and single-subject estimation is that the group-level parameter of interest is the ratio of meta-d’/d’ rather than meta-d’ itself. The rationale for this modelling choice is that while each subject or group may differ in type 1 d’, our parameter of interest is metacognitive efficiency at the group level, not meta-d’ (which itself will be influenced by subject- or group-level variability in d’). Thus d’ is treated as a subject-level nuisance parameter. (Alternative estimation schemes are possible; for instance, calculating the ratio of hierarchical nodes independently encoding meta-d’ and d’. I chose the ‘nuisance parameter’ scheme as it stays closest to the standard MLE approach while directly estimating a group-level node for meta-d’/d’.) An advantage of this scheme is that group-level inference is carried out directly on metacognitive efficiency rather than a transformed parameter. I specified model parameters such that the prior on log(meta-d’/d’) encompassed 167 MLE parameter estimates aggregated from the behavioural studies of metacognition of perceptual decision-making in our laboratory (Fleming et al. 2010; Fleming et al. 2012; Weil et al. 2013; Palmer et al. 2014). This prior was chosen to roughly capture the shape of the empirical distribution, while allowing additional variance to relax its influence on posterior estimates. The priors on both log(meta-d’/d’) and type 2 criteria weakly constrain parameter values to sensible ranges, and can be easily changed by the user in the model specification files. A log-normal prior is appropriate for a ratio parameter, ensuring that increases and decreases relative to the expected value of 1 are given equal weight (Keene 1995; Howell 2009).

Dependencies between nodes in the HMeta-d model are illustrated as a probabilistic graphical model in. The box encloses participant-level parameters subscripted with s. Each node is specified as follows [where M denotes log(meta-d’/d’)]:

represents a normal distribution parmeterized by mean and standard deviation; represents a positive-only, half-normal parameterized by standard deviation. and represent the group-level prior means and standard deviations of subject-level parameters. Thus and refer to the mean and SD of the type 2 criteria, and and to the mean and SD of log(meta-d’/d’). During model development, it was observed that the hierarchical variance parameter occasionally became ‘trapped’ near zero during sampling. This problem is fairly common in hierarchical models, and one solution is parameter expansion, whereby the original model is augmented by redundant multiplicative parameters that introduce an additional random component in the sampling process (Gelman and Hill 2007; Lee and Wagenmakers 2014). Here I employ the scheme suggested by Matzke et al. (2014), such that the mean and variance of are scaled by a redundant multiplicative parameter. The posterior on can then be recovered by adjusting for the influence of this additional random component.

The HMeta-d toolbox uses MCMC sampling as implemented in JAGS (Plummer 2003) to estimate the joint posterior distribution of all model parameters, given the model specification and the data. This estimation takes the form of samples from the posterior, with the entire sequence of samples known as a chain. It is important to check that these samples approximate the ‘stationary distribution’ of the posterior; i.e. that they are not affected by the starting point of the chain(s), and the sampling behaviour is roughly constant over time without slow drifts or autocorrelation. The default settings of the toolbox discard early samples to avoid sensitivity to initial values and run multiple chains, allowing the user to diagnose convergence problems as described below.


Preparing confidence rating data

Fitting of group-level data in the HMeta-d toolbox requires similar data preparation to that required when obtaining single-subject fits using MLE or SSE in Maniscalco and Lau’s MATLAB code (available at http://www.columbia.edu/∼bsm2105/type2sdt/; last accessed 31st August 2016). I therefore start with a short tutorial on preparing data for estimating single-subject meta-d’, before explaining how to input data from a group of subjects into the hierarchical model.

Data from each subject need to be coerced into two vectors, nR_S1 and nR_S2, which contain confidence-rating counts for when the ‘stimulus’ was S1 and S2, respectively. Each vector has length, where is the number of ratings available. Confidence counts are entered such that the first entry refers to counts of maximum confidence in an S1 response, and the last entry to maximum confidence in an S2 response. For example, if three levels of confidence rating were available and nR_S1 = [10050201051], this corresponds to the following rating counts following S1 presentation:

responded S1, rating = 3: 100 times

responded S1, rating = 2: 50 times

responded S1, rating = 1: 20 times

responded S2, rating = 1: 10 times

responded S2, rating = 2: 5 times

responded S2, rating = 3: 1 time

This pattern of responses corresponds to responding ‘high confidence, S1’ most often following S1 presentations, and least often with ‘high confidence, S2’. A mirror image of this vector would be expected for nR_S2. For example, nR_S2 = [378122789] corresponds to the following rating counts following S2 presentation:

responded S1, rating = 3: 3 times

responded S1, rating = 2: 7 times

responded S1, rating = 1: 8 times

responded S2, rating = 1: 12 times

responded S2, rating = 2: 27 times

responded S2, rating = 3: 89 times

Together these vectors specify the confidence stimulus response matrix that is the basis of the meta-d’ fit, and can be passed directly into Maniscalco and Lau’s fit_meta_d_MLE function to estimate meta-d’ on a subject-by-subject basis.


Fitting a hierarchical model

Estimating a group-level model using HMeta-d requires very little extra work. In HMeta-d, the nR_S1 and nR_S2 variables are cell arrays of vectors, with each entry in the cell containing confidence counts for a single subject. For example, to specify the confidence counts following S1 presentation listed above for subject 1, one would enter in MATLAB:

nR_S1{1} = [100 50 20 10 5 1]

and so on for each subject in the dataset. These cell arrays then contain confidence counts for all subjects, and are passed in one step to the main HMeta-d function:

fit = fit_meta_d_mcmc_group(nR_S1, nR_S2)

An optional third argument to this function is mcmc_params which is a structure containing flags for choosing different model variants, and for specifying the details of the MCMC routine. If omitted reasonable default settings are chosen.

The call to fit_meta_d_mcmc_group returns a ‘fit’ structure with several subfields. The key parameter of interest is fit.mu_logMratio, which is the mean of the posterior distribution of the group-level log(meta-d’/d’). fit.mcmc contains the samples of each parameter, which can be plotted with the helper function plotSamples. For instance to plot the MCMC samples of, one would enter:

plotSamples(exp(fit.mcmc.samples.mu_logMratio))

Note the ‘exp’ to allow plotting of meta-d’/d’ rather than log(meta-d’/d’). The exampleFit_ scripts in the toolbox provide other examples, such as how to set up response-conditional models and to visualize subject-level fits.

An important step in model fitting is checking that the MCMC chains have converged to a stationary distribution. While there is no way to guarantee convergence for a given number of MCMC samples, some heuristics can help identify problems. By using plotSamples, we can visualize the traces to check that there are no drifts or jumps and that each chain occupies a similar position in parameter space. Another useful statistic is Gelman and Rubin’s scale-reduction statistic, which is stored in the field fit.mcmc.Rhat for each parameter (Gelman and Rubin 1992). This provides a formal test of convergence that compares within-chain and between-chain variance of different runs of the same model, and will be close to 1 if the samples of the different chains are similar. Large values of indicate convergence problems and values < 1.1 suggest convergence.

As well as obtaining an estimate for group-level meta-d’/d’, we are often interested in our certainty in this parameter value. This can be estimated by computing the symmetric 95% credible interval (CI), which is the interval bounded by the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of MCMC samples. An alternative formulation is the 95% highest-density interval (HDI), which is the shortest possible interval containing 95% of the MCMC samples, and is not necessarily symmetric (Kruschke 2014). The helper functions calc_CI and calc_HDI take as input a vector of samples and return the 95% CI/HDI:

calc_CI(exp(fit.mcmc.samples.mu_logMratio(:))

The colon in the brackets selects all samples in the array regardless of their chain of origin. As HMeta-d uses Bayesian estimation it is straightforward to use the group-level posterior density for hypothesis testing. For instance, if the question is whether one group of subjects has greater metacognitive efficiency than a second group, we can ask whether the CI/HDI of the difference overlaps with zero (see ‘Empirical examples’ Section for an example of this). However, note that it is incorrect to use the subject-level parameters estimated as part of the hierarchical model in a frequentist test (e.g. a t-test); this violates the independence assumption.

In addition to enabling inference on individual parameter distributions, there may be circumstances in which we wish to compare models of different complexity (see ‘Discussion’ Section). To enable this, JAGS returns the deviance information criteria (DIC) for each model which is a summary measure of goodness of fit, while penalizing for model complexity (Spiegelhalter et al. 2002; lower is better). While DIC is known to be somewhat biased towards models with greater complexity, it is a common method for assessing model fit in hierarchical models. In HMeta-d the DIC for each model can be obtained in fit.mcmc.dic.


Simulations

To assess properties of the model fit and compare alternative fitting procedures, simulated confidence rating data were generated for pre-specified levels of metacognitive efficiency. Type 2 probabilities were computed from the equations in the Appendix for particular settings of meta-d’, c and c2. These probabilities were then used to generate multinomial response counts using the function mnrnd in MATLAB, where the sample size of each type 1 response class (hits, false alarms, correct rejections and misses) was obtained from a standard type 1 SDT model with criterion c and d’. This allowed for independent control over d’ (i.e. the number of hits and false alarms) and meta-d’ (the response-conditional distribution of confidence ratings). After determining the value of d’ for each simulation, the relevant value of meta-d’ could then be chosen to ensure a particular target meta-d’/d’ level. This procedure is implemented in the MATLAB function metad_sim included as part of the toolbox.


Results


Example fit

shows the output of a typical call to HMeta-d and the resultant posterior samples of the population-level estimate of metacognitive efficiency, plotted with plotSamples. The data were generated as 20 simulated subjects, each with 400 trials and 4 possible confidence levels (confidence criteria; type 1 criterion). For each subject, type 1 d’ was sampled from a normal distribution, and meta-d’/d’ was fixed at 0.8. The chains show excellent mixing with a modest number of samples (10 000 per chain; = 1.000) and the posterior is centred around the ground truth simulated value.


Parameter recovery

To further validate the model, a parameter recovery exercise was carried out in which data were simulated from 7 groups of 20 subjects with different levels of meta-d’/d’ = [0.5 0.75 1.0 1.25 1.5 1.75 2]. All other settings were as described in the previous section. plots the fitted group-level and its associated 95% CI for each of the simulated datasets against the empirical ground truth, demonstrating robust parameter recovery.


Empirical examples

To illustrate the practical application of HMeta-d I fit data from a recent experiment that examined metacognitive sensitivity in perceptual and mnemonic tasks in patients with post-surgical lesions and controls (Fleming et al. 2014). This study found (using single-subject estimates of meta-d’/d’) that metacognitive efficiency in patients with lesions to anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) was selectively compromised on a visual perceptual task but unaffected on a memory task, suggesting that the neural architecture supporting metacognition may comprise domain-specific components differentially affected by neurological insult.

For didactic purposes here I restrict comparison of metacognition in the aPFC patients (N = 7) and healthy controls (HC; N = 19) on the perceptual task. The task required a two-choice discrimination as to which of the two briefly presented patches contained a greater number of small white dots, followed by a continuous confidence rating on a sliding scale from 1 (low confidence) to 6 (high confidence). For analysis these confidence ratings were binned into four quantiles. For each subject confidence rating data (levels 1–4) were sorted according to the position of the target stimulus (L/R) and the subject’s response (L/R), thereby specifying the two nR_S1 and nR_S2 arrays required for estimating meta-d’.

For each group I constructed cell arrays of confidence counts and estimated with the default settings in HMeta-d. The resultant posterior distributions are plotted in, and the posterior distribution of the difference is shown in. Several features are evident from these outputs. First, there is a reduced metacognitive efficiency in the aPFC group compared with controls, as revealed by the 95% CI of the difference being greater than zero (right-hand panel). Second, the posterior distribution of metacognitive efficiency in the healthy controls is overlapping with the optimal estimate of 1. Finally, for the aPFC group, which compromises fewer subjects, there is a higher degree of uncertainty about the true metacognitive efficiency—the width of the posterior distribution is greater. This is due to the parameter estimate being constrained by fewer data points and is a natural consequence of the Bayesian approach.


Comparison of fitting procedures

To compare the quality of the fit of the hierarchical Bayesian method against MLE and SSE point-estimate approaches, I ran a series of simulation experiments to investigate parameter recovery of known meta-d’/d’ ratios for different d’ and type 2 criteria placements across a range of trial counts.

In each experiment, I simulated confidence rating data for groups of N = 20 subjects while manipulating the number of trials (20, 50, 100, 200, 400). In the first set of experiments, type 1 d’ was selected from the set (0.5, 1, 2), and two type 2 criteria were specified such that. The generated data thus consisted of a 2 (stimulus) 2 (responses) 2 (high/low confidence) matrix of response counts. In the second set of experiments type 1 d’ was kept constant at 1, and the type 2 criteria were selected from the set. Generative meta-d’/d’ was fixed at 1, and type 1 criterion was fixed at 0.

Each simulated subject’s data was fit using the MLE and SSE routines available from http://www.columbia.edu/∼bsm2105/type2sdt/, correcting for zero response counts by adding 0.25 to all cells [a generalization of the log-linear correction typically applied when estimating type 1 d’, as recommended by Hautus (1995)]. For each group of 20 subjects the mean meta-d’/d’ ratio and the output of a one-sample t-test against the null value of 1 was stored. The same data (without padding) were entered into the hierarchical Bayesian estimation routine as described above and the posterior mean stored. A false positive was recorded if a one-sample t-test against the null value (meta-d’/d’ = 1) was significant (P < 0.05) for the MLE/SSE approaches, or if the symmetric 95% credible interval excluded 1 for the hierarchical Bayesian approach. This procedure was repeated 100 times for each setting of trial counts and parameters.

shows the results of Experiments 1 and 2, respectively, for medium levels of metacognitive efficiency (meta-d’/d’ = 1). For intermediate values of d’ and criteria (middle panels), all methods perform similarly, and recover the true meta-d’/d’ ratio. However when d’ is low, or criteria are extreme, the MLE and SSE methods tend to misestimate metacognitive efficiency when the number of trials per subject is < 100, leading to high false positive rates. These misestimations are similar to the effect of zero cell-count corrections on recovery of type 1 d’ (Hautus 1995). In contrast, HMeta-d provides accurate parameter recovery in the majority of cases.

Why does HMeta-d outperform classical estimation procedures in this case? There are two possible explanations. First, HMeta-d may be more efficient at retrieving true parameter values, even when trial counts are low, by capitalizing on the hierarchical structure of the model to mutually constrain subject-level fits. Alternatively, HMeta-d may rely more on the prior when data are scarce, thus shrinking group estimates to the prior mean. The second explanation predicts that HMeta-d would become less accurate when true metacognitive efficiency deviates from the prior mean (meta-d’/d’ ∼ 1).

To adjudicate between these explanations I repeated the simulations at low (meta-d’/d’ = 0.5) and high (meta-d’/d’ = 1.5) metacognitive efficiency. These results show that HMeta-d is able to retrieve the true meta-d’/d’ even when metacognitive efficiency is appreciably less than or greater than 1, consistent with the prior exerting limited influence on the results. One notable exception is found when type 1 d’ is high, and trial counts are very low (∼20 per subject); in this case (upper right-hand panels), all fitting methods tend to overestimate metacognitive efficiency.

provides a summary of false positive rates recorded across all experiments for the three methods. Point-estimate approaches (SSE and MLE) return unacceptably high false positive rates when trial counts are less than ∼200 per subject, due to consistent over- or underestimation of metacognitive efficiency. In contrast, HMeta-d provides good control of the false positive rate in all cases except when trial counts are very low (<50 per subject).


Flexible extensions of the basic model

An advantage of working with Bayesian graphical models is that they are easily extendable to estimate other influences on metacognitive efficiency in the context of the same model (Lee and Wagenmakers 2014). For instance, one question of interest is whether metacognitive ability in one domain, such as perception, is predictive of metacognitive ability in another domain, such as memory. Evidence pertaining to this question is mixed: some studies have found evidence for a modest correlation in metacognitive efficiency across domains (McCurdy et al. 2013; Ais et al. 2016), whereas others have reported a lack of correlation (Kelemen et al. 2000; Baird et al. 2013). One critical issue in testing this hypothesis is that uncertainty in the model’s estimate of meta-d’ should be incorporated into an assessment of any correlation between the two domains. This is naturally accommodated by embedding an estimate of the correlation coefficient in a hierarchical estimation of metacognitive efficiency.

To expand the model, each subject’s metacognitive efficiencies in the two domains (M1, M2) are specified as draws from a bivariate Gaussian (Note parameter expansion is omitted here for clarity): Priors were specified as follows:

To demonstrate the application of this expanded model I simulated 100 subjects’ confidence data from the type 2 SDT model in two ‘tasks’. Each task’s generative meta-d’/d’ was drawn from a bivariate Gaussian with mean = and standard deviations. Type 1 d’ was generated separately for each task from a distribution. The generative correlation coefficient was set to 0.6. Data from both domains are then passed into the model simultaneously, and a group-level posterior distribution on the correlation coefficient is returned. shows this posterior together with the 95% CI, which encompasses the generative correlation coefficient.


Discussion

The quantification of metacognition from confidence ratings is a question with application in several subfields of psychology and neuroscience, including consciousness, decision-making, memory, education, aging and psychiatric disorders. There are now several tools in the psychologist’s armoury for estimating how closely subjective reports track task performance (Fleming and Lau 2014). An important advance is the recognition that simple correlation coefficients are affected by fluctuations in performance and confidence bias, and the meta-d’ model was developed to allow correction of metacognitive sensitivity for these potential confounds (Maniscalco and Lau 2012).

The hierarchical Bayesian approach to estimating metacognitive efficiency introduced here enjoys several advantages. It naturally incorporates variable uncertainty about finite hit and false-alarm rates; it is the correct way to incorporate information about within- and between-subject uncertainty; it avoids the need for edge correction or data modification, and provides a flexible framework for hypothesis testing and model expansion. The toolbox provides a simple MATLAB implementation that harnesses the MCMC sampler JAGS to return posterior distributions over group-level model parameters. The tutorial outlined how data preparation is identical to that required for the existing maximum-likelihood routines, allowing the user to easily apply both approaches once data are in the correct format. In simulation experiments, the hierarchical approach recovered more accurate parameter estimates than commonly used alternatives (MLE and SSE), and this benefit was greatest when there are limited numbers of trials per subject. It is notable that the point-estimate approaches severely underestimate average meta-d’/d’ ratios for low d’ and trial numbers < ∼100 per subject, leading to a high false positive rate. Given that low (type 1) d’ is commonplace in psychophysical studies of conscious awareness and metacognition, such biases may lead to erroneous conclusions that metacognitive efficiency is below the ideal observer prediction. In contrast, over-estimations were observed when d’ was high.


Practical recommendations for quantifying metacognition

If group-level estimates of meta-d’/d’ are of primary interest, HMeta-d allows direct, unbiased inference at this upper level of the hierarchy while appropriately handling participant-level uncertainty. The HMeta-d toolbox also allows Bayesian estimation of single-subject meta-d’, but if single-subject estimates are of primary interest, the MLE approach may be simpler and computationally less expensive. However, advantages of using a Bayesian approach even for single-subject estimates is that uncertainty in parameter estimates can be easily quantified (as the posterior credible interval), with such uncertainty appropriately reducing as trial count increases, and edge correction confounds are avoided.

More generally, whether one should use metacognitive sensitivity (e.g. meta-d’ or AUROC2) or metacognitive efficiency (meta-d’/d’) as a measure of metacognition depends on the goal of an analysis. For example, if we are interested in establishing the presence or absence of metacognition in a particular condition, such as when performance is particularly low (Scott et al. 2014) or in particular subject groups such as human infants (Goupil et al. 2016), computing metacognitive sensitivity alone may be sufficient. However, when comparing experimental conditions or groups which may differ systematically in performance, estimating metacognitive efficiency appropriately controls for confounds introduced by type 1 performance and response biases. Note however there are also limitations in the applicability of the meta-d’ model. First and foremost, the task should be amenable to analysis in a two-choice SDT framework, as fitting meta-d’ requires specification of a 2 (stimulus) 2 (response) N (confidence rating) matrix. If a task does not conform to these specifications (such as one with N alternative responses) then employing an alternative bias-free measure of metacognitive sensitivity such as the area under the type 2 ROC (AUROC2) may be preferable (Fleming and Lau 2014). In addition, like all analysis approaches, meta-d’ assumes a particular generative model of the confidence data that is at best incomplete, and untenable in certain circumstances. For instance, equal variance is specified for S1 and S2 distributions (Maniscalco and Lau’s fit_meta_d_MLE code allows setting the ratio of S1 and S2 variances as a free parameter; it would be possible to incorporate a similar parameter in future versions of HMeta-d. However as described by Maniscalco and Lau (2014) there is ambiguity between changes in response-specific metacognitive efficiency and the variance ratio, and therefore we recommend users employ the equal-variance model unless they have access to independent estimates of the variance inequality) and stable confidence criteria are assumed which may be at odds with the findings of serial adjustments in criteria (Treisman 1984; Rahnev et al. 2015; Norton et al. 2017).

More broadly, meta-d’ is primarily a tool for estimating metacognitive sensitivity, and additional considerations are needed when developing a complete model of confidence (Pouget et al. 2016; Fleming and Daw 2017). Recent modelling work has sought to explicitly characterize type 1 and type 2 processes (Jang et al. 2012; Maniscalco and Lau 2016; Fleming and Daw 2017), permitting flexible modelling of relationships between performance and metacognition. For instance, in Fleming and Daw’s ‘second-order’ model, an underlying generative model of action is specified, and confidence is formulated as an inference on the model’s probability of being correct, conditioned on both internal states and self-action. These frameworks allow for multiple drivers of metacognitive sensitivity, in contrast to the meta-d’ model which describes sensitivity only relative to type 1 performance. It is thus useful to view meta-d’ as complementary to these modelling efforts. Just as d’ provides a bias-free measure of perceptual sensitivity that may be explained by a number of contributing factors, meta-d’ provides a bias-free metric for metacognitive sensitivity without commitment to a particular processing architecture.


Future directions

The HMeta-d model code can be flexibly extended to allow estimation of other influences on metacognitive sensitivity. Here one simple example is explored, the specification of a population-level correlation coefficient relating metacognitive efficiencies across domains. More broadly, it may be possible to specify flexible general linear models linking trial- or subject-level variables to meta-d’ (Kruschke 2014). Currently this requires bespoke model specification, but in future work we hope to provide a flexible user interface for the specification of arbitrary models (cf. Wiecki et al. 2013). Estimation of single-trial influences on metacognitive efficiency, such as attentional state or brain activity, is a particularly intriguing proposition. Currently, estimation of meta-d’ requires many trials, restricting studies of the neural basis of metacognitive efficiency to between-condition or between-subject analyses. Extending the HMeta-d framework to estimate trial-level effects on meta-d’ may therefore accelerate our understanding of the neural basis of metacognitive efficiency.

Also naturally accommodated in a hierarchical framework is the comparison of different model structures for metacognition within and across tasks. A currently open question is whether metacognition relies on common or distinct processes across different domains, such as perception or memory (Baird et al. 2013; McCurdy et al. 2013; Fleming et al. 2014; Ais et al. 2016). One approach to addressing this question is to specify variants of the HMeta-d model in which different parameters are shared across domains, such as meta-d’ and/or the confidence criteria. Through model comparison, one could then obtain the model that best accounted for the relationship between metacognitive performance across different domains, and shed light on the common and distinct components.


Conclusions

This article introduces a hierarchical Bayesian approach to estimating metacognitive efficiency. This approach has several methodological advantages in comparison to current methods that focus on single-subject point estimates, and may prove particularly beneficial for studies of metacognition in patient populations and cognitive neuroscience experiments where often only limited data are available. More broadly, this framework can be flexibly extended to specify and compare different models of meta-d’ within a common scheme, thereby advancing our understanding of the neural and computational basis of self-evaluation.


Exploring the neural correlates of dream phenomenology and altered states of consciousness during sleep

Julian Mutz, Amir-Homayoun Javadi — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2017. PMC6007136, CC BY 4.0.

The science of dreaming constitutes a relevant topic in modern-day neuroscientific research and provides major insights into the study of human consciousness. Linking specific, universal, and regularly occurring stages of sleep with dreaming encourages the direct and systematic investigation of a topic that has fascinated humankind for centuries. In this review, we explore to what extent individuals dream during periods of rapid eye movement and non-rapid eye movement sleep, and we introduce research on lucid dreaming. We then discuss how dreaming during different stages of sleep varies in terms of phenomenological characteristics, and to what extent individuals are conscious throughout the sleep cycle. Finally, we provide a synopsis of the previous literature on brain activity during sleep, and we aim to clarify how the neurofunctional changes observed throughout sleep may lead to changes in phenomenological aspects of dreams, and in the domain of consciousness.

Keywords: sleep and dreaming, consciousness, phenomenology, neuroscience, psychosis


Introduction

Sleep deceives by the ingenuity of its illusions, that there are no certain indications by which we may clearly distinguish wakefulness from sleep. From death, even. —Philip Kerr, A Philosophical Investigation, 1992

Dreaming may be defined as a mental state, an altered state of consciousness, which occurs during sleep. Dreams usually involve fictive events that are organized in a story-like manner, characterized by a range of internally generated sensory, perceptual, and emotional experiences (Desseilles et al. 2011). The world of dreams constitutes a major aspect of human experience and has both fascinated and mystified mankind since time immemorial. Much has been speculated about the origin, meaning, and purpose of dreaming, while the private nature of dreams has made an objective analysis extremely difficult (Horikawa et al. 2013). Early accounts of dream interpretation suggested that dreams predict the future (Artemidorus 1975) or reflect the current state of one’s mental health (Bond 1753). The scientific investigation of dreaming only emerged during the late 19th century and primarily focused on factors that influence dream content (e.g. odours) (Hervey de Saint-Denys 1867).

Throughout the past few decades, several biological and psychological theories about the purpose of dreaming have been put forward (Lavie and Hobson 1986; Barbera 2008). Whereas earlier theories by psychoanalytic scholars suggested that dreams constitute a meaningful reflection of unconscious processes ‘whose psychic importance is equal to that of the conscious mind itself’ (Jung 1934, 139), others have argued that dreams are not inherently meaningful. According to one of the most prominent theories of the origin of dreams, the activation-synthesis hypothesis, dreaming results from rapid eye movement (REM) sleep physiology (Hobson and McCarley 1977). More recent theories suggest that dreams fulfil an adaptive function related to emotion-regulation, learning, and memory consolidation (e.g. Eiser 2005; Desseilles et al. 2011). Dreaming may play an important role in reactivating and further consolidating novel and individually relevant experiences that occurred during waking hours (Cipolli et al. 2004; Schwartz 2010). It might also constitute a biological defence mechanism, which has evolved as a capacity to repeatedly simulate threatening situations (Revonsuo 2000).

In the present review, we provide an overview of the extent to which dreaming occurs during different stages of sleep and discuss how dreams vary in terms of phenomenological characteristics and consciousness. To this end, one way of studying a mechanism— such as consciousness—is to examine it in different states of functionality. This is a necessary endeavour to gather a comprehensive understanding of the overall functionality of the mechanism or process in question. We provide a synopsis of the literature that explored the neural correlates of dreaming and highlight some methodological issues in dream research. Our aim is to clarify how the neural correlates of dreams relate to changes in phenomenological characteristics and features of consciousness throughout sleep.


Dreaming in Different Phases of Sleep

Every night individuals undergo several cycles of REM and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (further described below) that are on average 90–100 min long. Dreaming often goes unnoticed, and people tend to underestimate how often and how much they dream (Nir and Tononi 2010). This is due to our tendency to forget dreams, also known as dream amnesia (Roth et al. 1988).


REM sleep

During the early 1950s, Aserinsky and Kleitman (1953) discovered REM sleep, which is characterized by REMs, global high-frequency and low amplitude electroencephalogram (EEG) activity (similar to the waking state), as well as increased heart rate, respiratory activity, and muscle atonia (i.e. temporary muscular paralysis; Jouvet 1994). In the early days of dream research, dream physiology was equated with REM sleep physiology (Aserinsky and Kleitman 1953; Dement and Kleitman 1957; Eiser 2005) because individuals are most likely to report dreams after awaking from this phase of sleep (Maquet et al. 1996, Nofzinger et al. 1997; Maquet 2000; Fox et al. 2013). However, it is important to note that REM sleep and dreaming can be dissociated: lesions in the forebrain can leave REM sleep intact while dreaming ceases, whereas brain stem lesions can prevent REM sleep from occurring while individuals continue to report dreams after awakening (Solms 2000).


NREM sleep

Even though dream research has in the past mostly focused on the study of REM sleep, awakenings from NREM sleep yielded reports of dreaming as well (Foulkes 1962; Nielsen 2000; Nir and Tononi 2010; Limosani et al. 2011). NREM sleep is now commonly divided into three different stages (N1, N2, and N3; Iber et al. 2007) [N3 sleep, also known as deep sleep or slow-wave sleep, was referred to as NREM sleep stages III and IV in earlier terminology (Foulkes 1962).] and is in several ways physiologically distinct from REM sleep. NREM sleep is characterized by a global low frequency and high amplitude EEG signal, slow and regular breathing and heart rate, as well as low blood pressure. Sleep stage N1 reports frequently contain accounts of dreaming (80–90% of the time), but these reports tend to be shorter than those following periods of REM sleep (Foulkes 1966). Reports after awakenings from NREM sleep N3 contained accounts of dreaming 50–70% of the time (Nielsen 2000); only few reports contained elements of dreaming after awakenings from N3 sleep early during the night, when large slow waves are most prevalent in the EEG signal (Stickgold et al. 2001). Sleep inertia (i.e. the subjective feeling of grogginess following abrupt awakening) after awakening from deep sleep (NREM sleep stage N3) makes the evaluation of reports following these stages very difficult, and it is unclear to what extent individuals are conscious during this phase (Chugh et al. 1996).

Dreams that were reported after awakenings from NREM sleep were frequently attributed to confounding factors such as recall of dreams from REM sleep periods or waking confabulations (i.e. the unintentional production of false, distorted, or misinterpreted memories). However, it is important to note that reports of dreams after awakenings from NREM sleep are not merely a recall of dreams that occurred during the REM sleep phase (Nielsen 2000), because (1) dreaming has been reported after awakenings from the first period of NREM sleep before the occurrence of REM sleep (Nielsen 2000; Cavallero et al. 1992) and (2) individuals reported dreams after awaking from short naps that consisted of NREM sleep only (Suzuki et al. 2004; Carr and Nielsen 2015). As such, it has been suggested that dreaming during NREM sleep relates to “covert REM” brain activation processes, which occur outside polysomnographically scored REM sleep (Nielsen 2000). In line with this view, it is important to realize that wakefulness, REM, and NREM sleep are not necessarily mutually exclusive phenomena (Mahowald and Schenck 2005); sleep is far from being homogenous in terms of mental experiences. Hence, dreaming might be described along a continuum, ranging from thought-like mentation that is typical of the early stages of NREM sleep to very vivid dreams that are more typical of REM sleep (Desseilles et al. 2011).


Lucid dreaming

Lucid dreaming is a rare state of sleep in which individuals achieve awareness of their own state of consciousness. According to the most frequently used sleep scoring criteria, lucid dreaming is considered being a part of REM sleep (Rechtschaffen and Kales 1968; Iber et al. 2007) and typically occurs during late night REM sleep periods (Voss et al. 2009). However, recent preliminary evidence suggests that lucid dreaming may also occur during periods of NREM sleep (Stumbrys and Erlacher 2012). Lucid dreaming has a special status compared with non-lucid REM and NREM dreaming because it is a skill that needs to be trained and occurs only rarely in untrained individuals. Dream lucidity can be achieved through metacognitive training, developing autosuggestions, external sensory stimulation, and through frequently contemplating about one’s own state of consciousness (LaBerge 1980; Hearne 1983; Purcell et al. 1986; Stumbrys et al. 2012). Lucid dreaming itself might occur in different degrees, ranging from pre-lucid reflections (i.e. a minimal awareness that one is dreaming) to deliberately controlling the dream narrative (Hearne 1982; Tyson et al. 1984; Barrett 1992; Kahan and LaBerge 1994). Since dream lucidity can be trained and signalized in experimental settings by means of the eye-signalling technique (LaBerge et al. 1981), it constitutes a promising endeavour for dream and consciousness research.


Phenomenological Characteristics of Different Sleep Phases

Many of the typical qualities of dreaming are similar to our waking experience. Such similarities include the full range of multimodal sensory qualities, colourful visual imagery, occasionally realistic pain perception, as well as almost identical spatial organization (i.e. the experience of a real world with the dreamer being at its centre) (Windt and Noreika 2011). However, Swiss psychiatrist and founder of Analytical Psychology Carl Jung already recognized in his famous work On the Nature of Dreams that dreams could be distinguished from wakefulness ‘by many “bad qualities” such as lack of logic, questionable morality, uncouth form, and apparent absurdity or nonsense’ (Jung 1945, 364). Interestingly, the phenomenological characteristics of dreams in the various phases of the sleep cycle differ in several ways.


REM sleep

Narrative. Particularly rich, emotional, and perceptually vivid dream experiences have been reported after awakenings from REM sleep (e.g. Foulkes 1962; Dresler et al. 2015). Dreaming during REM sleep typically follows loose, fanciful, and often very bizarre narratives; relates to current concerns; reflects interests, personality, and mood; draws on long-term memory; and involves social interactions (Hall and Van de Castle 1966; Domhoff 2003; Fox et al. 2013; Underwood 2013; Foulkes 2014). The dreamer is often uncertain about time, space, and personal identities and typically has the subjective experience of being awake (Schwartz and Maquet 2002). Reports of dreaming tend to be most elaborate and bizarre after waking up from the last period of REM sleep (Hobson 2009).

Sensation and perception. Dreams share similarities with experiences during wakefulness, since the perceptual modalities that are utilized most during waking hours also dominate during dreaming (Hobson 1989). Dream experiences are typically characterized by a range of visual and auditory sensations, physical activities such as self-motion or interaction with objects in the environment, and involve written and spoken language (Desseilles et al. 2011). Reports of awakenings from REM sleep contain significantly more accounts of sensory experiences than do reports following NREM sleep (Carr and Nielsen 2015). Tactile percepts, odours, tastes, as well as pleasure and pain are not as commonly reported following REM sleep awakenings (Hall and Van de Castle 1966; Domhoff 2003; Hobson 2009; Foulkes 2014). Oftentimes the sensational and perceptual experiences of the dream world are unlike those which occur in the world of wakefulness. Alterations from waking life experiences include sensory distortions, misidentifications of characters and places, changes in spatio-temporal integration (e.g. the integration of time and location of an event), misbinding of objects’ features, dissociation, and transpositions (e.g. frequent and abrupt changes in the dream narrative) (Desseilles et al. 2011).

Emotion. Reports following REM sleep awakenings consistently contain more emotional content than those following NREM sleep (Wamsley et al. 2007). Dreamers tend to report elevated levels of joy, surprise, anger, fear, and anxiety (Foulkes et al. 1988; Strauch and Meier 1996; Fosse et al. 2001), whereas sadness, guilt, and depressed affect tend to be less common. A possible explanation for this finding might be less critical self-reflection during dreams (Hobson et al. 2000). Since REM dream reports frequently contain fear- and anxiety-related elements (Valli and Revonsuo 2009), it has been suggested that the realistic representation of fear in dreams and nightmares serves as a threat simulation in a harmless environment in order to prepare individuals for dangerous situations in real life (Revonsuo 2000; Valli et al. 2005). It has also been shown that several periods of dreaming during one night may be related to the same emotional conflict (Offenkrantz and Rechtschaffen 1963).


NREM sleep

During the sleep-onset phase, individuals frequently experience hypnagogic hallucinations while being unaware that they have already fallen asleep (Underwood 2013). These experiences share some similarities with dreams during REM sleep in terms of dream bizarreness but are typically characterized by emotional flatness (Foulkes and Vogel 1965; Vogel et al. 1972). They are often static (Hobson et al. 2000; Hobson and Pace-Schott 2002) and usually involve no self-character (Foulkes 2014). Activities that were performed before sleeping might influence the content of such hallucinations (Stickgold et al. 2000; Wamsley et al. 2010).

After the sleep-onset, NREM dreams are typically more thought-like, fragmentary, and related to current concerns, unlike the vivid, hallucinatory, and mainly visual content of REM dreams (Eiser 2005). After awakenings from sleep stage N3 early during the night, reports tend to be short, thought-like, less vivid, less visual, less motorically animated, less emotional, and less emotionally pleasant than REM reports, while being more conceptual, more plausible, more concerned with current issues, and typically involve greater volitional control (Rechtschaffen 1973; Hobson et al. 2000). Late night NREM sleep reports are usually longer and more hallucinatory, often indistinguishable from REM sleep reports (Monroe et al. 1965; Antrobus et al. 1995).


Similarities with psychosis

Interestingly, dream phenomenology has often been compared with psychosis because dreams share large similarities with many of the typical characteristics of psychosis and particularly with the positive symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g. false beliefs due to incorrect inferences about reality or distorted sensory perceptions that have no apparent external source) (Hobson 1989; Hobson et al. 2000; Hobson and Pace-Schott 2002; Limosani et al. 2011; Windt and Noreika 2011; D’Agostino et al. 2013). These similarities range from internally generated, vivid imagery to intensified and often inappropriate affect as well as diminished ego functions (i.e. the capacity to distinguish what is occurring in one’s mind and what is occurring in the outside world). Most pronounced are elevated levels and uncritical acceptance of cognitive bizarreness, decreased reality testing, and the delusional belief of being awake while dreaming (Limosani et al. 2011). Furthermore, the dreamer lacks control of dream events and often shows blunted distinction between first- and third-person perspectives (Hobson et al. 1998; Schwartz and Maquet 2002; Maquet et al. 2005). These observations are supported by functional magnetic resonance imagining data of psychotic patients, which suggest that dream bizarreness (i.e. improbability, incongruity, and vagueness) largely overlaps with patients’ incongruous and bizarre waking experience (for review, see Limosani et al. 2011). In fact, there are remarkable similarities in terms of cognitive bizarreness between the waking thoughts of individuals with psychosis, their dream reports, and the dream reports of healthy individuals (e.g. Scarone et al. 2008). Interestingly though, the psychotic patients differ from the healthy individuals in that they tend to judge their dream reports as less bizarre (Lusignan et al. 2009); they fail to distinguish self-generated and non-self-generated percepts and perceive cognitive bizarreness as being real without any critical reflection (D’Agostino et al. 2013).

Contrasting the state of lucid dreaming with psychosis, Dresler et al. (2015) suggested that understanding lucidity during dreams may shed light on the mechanisms underlying the lack of insight into the delusional nature of one’s current state of consciousness that patients with psychosis often suffer from. Taken together, these findings indicate that there might be a shared mechanism responsible for some of the features of dreaming and psychosis (Limosani et al. 2011). However, a recent paper by Mota et al. (2016) challenges this notion: psychotic lucid dreamers reported more frequent control of their dreams than non-psychotic lucid dreamers. As such, psychosis could potentially amplify the experience of internal stimuli at the expenses of external ones, enabling psychotic patients to better control their internal reality than healthy individuals.


Changes in Level and Quality of Consciousness during Sleep

‘Just as the psyche has a diurnal side which we call consciousness, so also it has a nocturnal side: the unconscious psychic activity which we apprehend as dreamlike fantasy’ (Jung 1934, 147). In line with this notion, Jung (1945, 364) suggested that dreams are ‘fragment[s] of involuntary psychic activity, just conscious enough to be reproducible in the waking state.’ Even though this illustrates that dreaming and wakefulness likely differ with regards to conscious experience, advances in cognitive neuroscience and dream research reveal that these differences are not as clear-cut as originally assumed but can—in a simplified model—be placed along a continuum (more complex models assume a space of multiple dimensions; Voss and Voss 2014; Bayne et al. 2016). These range from no consciousness to simple awareness of perception and emotion (i.e. primary consciousness) to self-reflective awareness, abstract thinking, volition, and metacognition (i.e. secondary consciousness, also referred to as higher-order consciousness or self-consciousness) (Morin 2006). [It should be noted that a number of different models concerning the idea of levels of consciousness have been proposed: for instance, the four-level structural model of cognition by Brown (1976), Neisser’s (1997) five-level model of consciousness, a three-level model by Schooler (2002), or Block’s (1995) notion of phenomenal and access consciousness. In the present review, we use the concepts of primary and secondary consciousness to represent the general notions of sensory awareness and higher level of awareness such as reflection, respectively. These concepts fit the purpose of our distinction between different states of consciousness during sleep (Edelman 1992); they have been frequently used in the sleep and dream research literature (Edelman 2003; Hobson and Voss 2011; Kahan and LaBerge 2011; D’Agostino et al. 2013; Voss et al. 2014; Zink and Pietrowsky 2015).]

One can generally differentiate between consciousness during wakefulness, consciousness during dreaming, and non-consciousness, with the possibility of intermediate states being present (Limosani et al. 2011). Consciousness during waking hours is characterized by the awareness of the external world, our bodies, and our selves. When people are dreaming, they are to some extent consciously aware of their internal world, have sensory, perceptual, and emotional experiences but typically fail to recognize their own condition, the bizarre features of the dream world, their poor memory access, and their limited thought capabilities (Hobson 2009). Dream consciousness and waking consciousness may differ in terms of their origin (i.e. their respective causal pathway), with the former partly representing an offline, internally generated simulation of the latter. In line with this notion, it has been suggested that dreams may be seen as a purer form of consciousness, which is free of the constraints imposed by the perception of, and interaction with, physical environments (Revonsuo 2006).

Early reports suggested a single-mindedness and isolation during dreaming, which refers to the dreamer being absorbed in the dream world without being aware of an alternative reality (Rechtschaffen 1978). However, the nature, level, and quality of conscious experience during sleep show large variability (Nir and Tononi 2010). To some extent, this might be comparable to the multiplicity of conscious substates that occur during wakefulness (e.g. task vs. default modes of the brain) (Singer and Antrobus 1965; Raichle and Mintun 2006). Consciousness is clearly not an all-or-nothing phenomenon but a multifaceted concept with aspects varying across species, vigilance states (i.e. the degree of responsiveness to stimuli), and health conditions.

Although there is likely a consensus that consciousness exists while individuals are dreaming, there is an ongoing debate as to whether consciousness exists during dreamless sleep as well (Windt et al. 2016). Some authors argue that consciousness continues throughout dreamless sleep, provided that one remains aware of having slept. The topic of dreamless sleep is beyond the scope of this paper (for further discussions on this issue, please see Thompson 2015; see also Windt 2015).


REM sleep

Dreams that occur during REM sleep show mostly aspects of primary but not of secondary consciousness. During REM sleep, the dreamer tends to have less metacognitive activity (i.e. the processes by which individuals monitor and control their own cognitive processes), reflective thought, and volitional capabilities (Kahan et al. 1997; Kahan and LaBerge 2011; Dresler et al. 2014). The dreamer has only limited access to information about the past and anticipated future, and typically concerns him or herself exclusively with the present content of the dream narrative (Fox et al. 2013). However, some reports of REM dreams involve reflective thought, such as puzzlement about improbable or impossible events, contemplative alternatives in decision-making, and reflection during social interactions (Wolman and Kozmová 2007), as well as theory of mind processes (i.e. the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and others) (Kahn and Hobson 2005).


NREM sleep

Reports of conscious experience across NREM sleep phases vary to a great extent (Rechtschaffen 1973). Although the frequency of reporting dreams after NREM awakenings is sparse and generally less elaborate than after periods of REM sleep, which might be due to the brain’s inability to encode memories of the dreams (Massimini et al. 2005), the very existence of NREM dream reports provides evidence for the idea that consciousness does not fully cease during NREM sleep (e.g. Goodenough et al. 1965; Suzuki et al. 2004).


Lucid dreaming

Lucid dreaming is a hybrid state of consciousness with features of both waking and dreaming (e.g. hallucinatory dream activity combined with aspects of primary and secondary consciousness such as self-reflective thought, abstract thinking, metacognition, and agentive control) (Voss et al. 2009). Dresler et al. (2014) recently investigated how volitional aspects of consciousness vary across wakefulness, non-lucid, and lucid dreaming. They found that levels of self-determination (i.e. the subjective experience of acting freely according to one’s will) were similar for lucid dreaming and wakefulness while being reduced in periods of non-lucid dreaming. Furthermore, planning ability (i.e. how well organized one pursues plans and intentions) seemed to be impaired during both non-lucid and lucid dreaming. However, this may be because it is not necessary to plan during dreams and spontaneous execution of intentions is simply more common. Intention enactment (i.e. how promptly and determined intentions are executed) was most pronounced during lucid dreaming and did not differ between wakefulness and non-lucid dreaming. This seems plausible because the lucid dreamer is aware that obstacles in dreams are not real and can easily be overcome (Dresler et al. 2014). In line with this, it has been suggested that restored access to metacognitive abilities and memory functions during lucid dreaming enable the dreamer to execute his or her intentions (Metzinger 2004; Windt and Metzinger 2007). Contrasting lucid dreaming and non-lucid dreaming mirrors contrasting primary and secondary consciousness (Dresler et al. 2009). Non-lucid REM sleep dreams lack those very features of secondary consciousness, which are the defining characteristic of dream lucidity. These include insight, control over though and actions, as well as logical thought (Voss et al. 2013). Interestingly, lucid dreaming may be the only phenomenon that can be utilized to examine changes in primary and secondary consciousness in the same vigilance level (Spoormaker et al. 2010) and therefore constitutes an important topic of research.


Brain Activity during Sleep

Establishing a link between dreaming and its underlying neurofunctional changes constitutes a major challenge for researchers (Limosani et al. 2011) because dreaming arises from brain activity that is largely independent of interactions with external stimuli (Revonsuo 2006). Dream research typically aims to retrospectively correlate neural activity with the dream characteristics that are common to all dreams (e.g. dream bizarreness—although varying tremendously depending on the sleep stage) rather than the content of individual dreams (Nir and Tononi 2010; but see Siclari et al. 2017). Periods of REM sleep, NREM sleep, and lucid dreaming are characterized by patterns of regional brain activity that are both similar and distinct from those observed during wakefulness. In what follows, we review studies on brain activity during REM and NREM sleep rather than brain activity during REM and NREM ‘dreaming’ per se. As such, it is important to note that the interpretations of these findings are to some extent speculative, given that the methods used in the majority of these studies do not allow for a separation of the duration of REM/NREM sleep and dreaming.


REM sleep

The REM sleep phase has most clearly been defined in terms of neurofunctional activation, which corresponds to some of the key characteristics of the subjective experience of dreaming (e.g. vivid imagery as well as articulate and incongruous storylines) (Limosani et al. 2011).

Similarities with wakefulness. The EEG signal during REM sleep shares large similarities with that of wakefulness, and positron emission tomography (PET) studies have shown that global brain metabolism tends to be very similar as well (Hobson et al. 2000; Maquet 2000).

Hyperactivity. Several brain regions become particularly active during REM sleep. There is strong metabolic activity in higher-order occipito-temporal visual association areas, which might be responsible for the often very vivid visual dream imagery during REM sleep (Braun et al. 1997; Nofzinger et al. 1997; Maquet et al. 2000). Hyperactivity in motor regions such as the primary motor and premotor cortices, the cerebellum, and the basal ganglia may account for the frequently reported motor content of dreams (Braun et al. 1997; Maquet et al. 2000). Furthermore, increased levels of activity have been observed in the pontine tegmentum, the thalamus, the basal forebrain, as well as in limbic and paralimbic structures (e.g. amygdaloid complexes, hippocampal formation, and anterior cingulate cortex) (Maquet et al. 1996; Braun et al. 1997; Nofzinger et al. 1997). These brain regions are associated with emotional processing and might be responsible for the often very intense emotional aspects of REM sleep dreaming (Maquet and Phillips 1998; Hobson et al. 2000). There is also increased activity in other regions such as the medial prefrontal cortex, circuits of the medial temporal lobe region, and the posterior cingulate cortex (Maquet et al. 1996; Braun et al. 1997, Nofzinger et al. 1997; Fox et al. 2013), which are implicated in memory and self-referential processing (Nofzinger et al. 1997; Ioannides et al. 2009). In fact, there is striking overlap between the default mode network (i.e. the network of brain regions that are active when an individual is awake and not currently engaged in a task), which is associated with self-referential processing, and areas that become increasingly active during REM sleep (Fox et al. 2013). This network may play a key role in both mind-wandering and dreaming and possibly represents a shared neural substrate of the two phenomena (Domhoff and Fox 2015).

Hypoactivity. Even though several brain regions become hyperactive during REM sleep, a number of structures show decreased levels of activity. Among these structures is the right inferior parietal cortex, which is involved in waking volition (Goldberg et al. 2008; Desmurget et al. 2009) and which contributes to a unified representation of self and self versus other perspectives (Farrer et al. 2003). Decreased activity of the right inferior parietal cortex (Maquet et al. 1996; Braun et al. 1997) might allow the dreamer to participate in both first- and third-person perspectives (Maquet et al. 2005). Moreover, there is deactivation of executive regions of the prefrontal cortex such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the orbitofrontal cortex, but also in regions including the posterior cingulate gyrus, the precuneus, and the inferior parietal cortex. These areas are typically involved in cognitive control, metacognition, and ego functions (e.g. orientation in time and space, reality testing, and self-monitoring) and may underlie the lack of insight, restricted volitional capacities, and impaired metacognition during dreaming (Maquet et al. 1996; Braun et al. 1997; Nofzinger et al. 1997; Maquet 2000, Hobson and Pace-Schott 2002; Schwartz and Maquet 2002; Fox et al. 2013). Hypoactivation of the prefrontal cortex may also be a contributing factor for dream amnesia (Fox et al. 2013).


NREM sleep

The neuroscientific study of NREM dreaming only emerged more recently, but findings tend to be more informative with regards to exploring the neural correlates of dreaming because of methodological and data-analytical advances including the use of computational learning algorithms. A recent study by Horikawa et al. (2013) which utilized machine learning techniques showed that visual imagery during sleep onset is represented by brain regions including the early visual pathway, fusiform face area, and parahippocampal place area. Brain activity underlying these hypnagogic hallucinations may differ from that underlying dreams occurring during REM sleep though (Underwood 2013). Utilizing high-density EEG recordings and performing serial awakenings, Siclari et al. (2017) showed that dream reports following awakenings from the N2 stage were preceded by ‘decreased’ low-frequency and ‘increased’ high-frequency power in bilateral parieto-occipital areas including the medial and lateral occipital lobes as well as the precuneus and posterior cingulate gyrus (for high-frequency power, the lateral frontal and temporal cortices showed increased activity as well). Furthermore, the authors confirmed these findings for sleep stages N2 and N3 in an independent sample and irrespective of the dreamer’s ability to remember specific dream contents.


Lucid dreaming

Periods of lucid dreaming show increased activity in areas such as the DLPFC, bilateral frontopolar prefrontal cortex, and parietal areas including the precuneus, the inferior parietal lobules, and the supramarginal gyrus. It has been suggested that the fronto-parietal activity during lucid dreaming corresponds to the reinstantiation of reflective capabilities (Dresler et al. 2015), thereby mediating features of secondary consciousness (Dresler et al. 2012) such as metacognitive evaluation (Stuss et al. 2001; Schmitz et al. 2004; Fleming et al. 2012) and self-referential processing (Cavanna and Trimble 2006). In fact, research on the neural correlates of lucid dreaming might be key in understanding the neural substrates of secondary consciousness (Hobson and Voss 2010; Dresler et al. 2014). So far, the study of lucid dreaming is limited to periods of REM sleep because the classical method to investigate lucid dreaming, the eye-signalling technique, is not applicable to NREM sleep (Dresler et al. 2015). Furthermore, research on lucid dreaming mostly pertains to case studies, and conclusions about the neural correlates of lucid dreaming should be regarded as preliminary.


Neural Correlates of Dream Phenomenology and Changes in Consciousness

The heterogeneous brain activity during sleep may explain some of the typical features of, and variation across, dreams during different stages of sleep (Desseilles et al. 2011). This is in line with Pace-Schott (2010) who described dreaming as ‘an imprecise experiential simulacrum [i.e. a representation or imitation] of waking resulting from neurobiological processes that must differ from those that generate waking consciousness.’


Consciousness

Decreased metabolic activity in the DLPFC during periods of REM sleep might be responsible for reduced features of secondary consciousness, which return during periods of lucid dreaming when the DLPFC becomes more active again (Voss et al. 2009; Hobson and Voss 2010; Dresler et al. 2012). During REM sleep dreaming, the dreamer thinks that he or she is awake, which is a delusion that might be due to persistent inactivation of frontal and parietal circuits necessary for waking memory, self-reflective awareness, and insight. The global deactivation of the pontine tegmentum, the amygdala, the anterior commissure, the parietal operculum, deep frontal white matter, and the mid-line thalamus during NREM sleep compared with waking, and their subsequent reactivation during REM sleep might explain why some aspects of consciousness during REM sleep might be more readily available than during NREM sleep (Maquet et al. 1996; Braun et al. 1997; Nofzinger et al. 1997). However, preliminary findings suggest that localized activity changes in the parieto-occipital region, irrespective of global activity in the rest of the cortex, may constitute a marker of conscious experience during sleep (Siclari et al. 2017). The neural correlates of lucid dreaming largely overlap with brain areas that are involved in self-reflective thought and subserve volitional capabilities (Voss et al. 2009; Hobson and Voss 2010; Dresler et al. 2014).


Phenomenology

According to the principle of perceptual equivalence (Finke 1989), there are common neural substrates for perception and imagery. Some of the visual experiences during the sleep onset phase are represented by brain activity patterns that are similar to the ones observed during stimulus perception (Horikawa et al. 2013), and activation in visual-occipital and auditory-temporal cortices during REM sleep may underlie the visual and auditory elements that are frequently reported after awakenings from REM sleep (Braun et al. 1997). In line with this, patients with extrastriate occipito-temporal lesions report cessation of visual dream imagery (Solms 1997). Several other behaviours share similar neural correlates during wakefulness and dreaming (Erlacher and Schredl 2008; Siclari et al. 2017). For instance, dream hand movements activate the same areas of the motor cortex that are active when actually executing hand movements during wakefulness (Dresler et al. 2011). Since a range of subcortical and neocortical structures that are active during waking are also active during REM sleep, but inactive during NREM sleep, this might explain why the phenomenological experience of dreaming during REM sleep is much more diverse than during NREM sleep (Hobson 2009). For instance, waking emotional processes that are active during REM sleep are inhibited during NREM sleep, and mechanisms governing sensory vividness of imagery are enhanced in REM sleep while being inhibited during periods of NREM sleep (Carr and Nielsen 2015).


Conclusion and Future Directions

In what follows we will highlight some important shortcomings that have emerged from reviewing the current literature on the neural correlates of dreaming and we will suggest potential ways to address these in future research.

Given that most research has focused on the study of REM sleep, much remains to be learned about the mechanisms underlying dreaming during NREM sleep. Future investigations should more systematically contrast the different phases of NREM sleep with wakefulness, REM sleep, and periods of lucid dreaming. Recent efforts in dream research have investigated whether daytime naps are suitable for sampling and comparing dreaming during REM and NREM sleep. It was shown that recall rates for REM and NREM naps were slightly elevated to normal night-time recall rates (Carr and Nielsen 2015), making it perhaps an even more efficient tool to study dreams.

Causal links have—until recently—not received much attention in the literature on dreaming. Novel brain stimulation methods including transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) and transcranial magnetic stimulation can be used to make causal inferences on the relationship between brain activity and behaviour (e.g. Nieminen et al. 2016). For example, tACS has recently been utilized to experimentally induce lucid dreaming (Noreika et al. 2010; Stumbrys et al. 2013; Voss et al. 2014), and might hence be a valuable tool for a more systematic study of the neural substrates of dreaming.

No objective assessment (or verification) of dreams is currently possible and researchers rely exclusively on the collection of subjective dream reports. These are being obtained only after a change in vigilance state has occurred, which might alter the quality and content of the report (Kussé et al. 2010). Novel brain imaging methods, in terms of both hardware (e.g. functional near-infrared spectroscopy, fNIR or fNIRS; Dresler et al. 2011), and software (statistical learning or machine learning algorithms; Huth et al. 2016; Wen et al. 2016, preprint; Zurawel et al. 2016) may enable a more objective readout of the dream. This is particularly important considering that (i) memory is reconstructive and there is a time lag between the actual dream and its report, (ii) the original dream content may be distorted due to interfering material of the waking environment, (iii) there are limitations inherent to verbal reports, and (iv) moral censorship (Hobson et al. 2000; Windt 2013). Moreover, the absence of dream reports does not necessarily imply an absence of dreaming, since these are easily and quickly forgotten.

At present, most researchers are working in highly specialized fields (e.g. research on sleep and lucid dreaming), potentially overlooking knowledge in other relevant areas (e.g. coma and vegetative state) that could benefit their own discipline. To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms underlying consciousness, cross-fertilization between multiple fields is necessary.

Some evidence suggests that dream lucidity training can be applied in clinical settings as a form of nightmare therapy (Spoormaker et al. 2003; Spoormaker and Van Den Bout 2006). Although the mechanism of action of lucid dreaming is not fully understood, examining the characteristics of patients for whom this type of therapy seems effective may shed light on the nature of lucid dreaming itself.

Understanding the mechanisms underlying consciousness in the healthy human brain might enable us to identify processes that are dysfunctional in pathologies, thereby enabling us to develop better treatments. For instance, lucid dreaming might be of therapeutic value in sleep disorders and for individuals experiencing frequent nightmares. At the same time, studies on the neural correlates of dreaming in clinical populations are informative: for example, a recent study by Dodet et al. (2015) has shown that comparing individuals with and without narcolepsy can elucidate the nature of lucid dreaming.

Due to limited space, only a small number of studies on pathological states were included in the present review. Moreover, research on altered states of consciousness that occur during meditation (Lutz et al. 2007), hypnosis (Rainville and Price 2003), vegetative states (Owen et al. 2006), coma (Laureys and Schiff 2012), or drug use (Carhart-Harris et al. 2014) could not be discussed here.

The study of dreaming is of major importance insofar as it helps to more fully understand consciousness. It offers a unique opportunity to gain insight into the processes and mechanisms involved in waking consciousness through studying the similarities with, and differences from, dream consciousness. However, we have only just started to understand the neural correlates of dreaming.


Can hypnosis displace the threshold for visual consciousness?

Hernán Anlló, Jérôme Sackur — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2018. PMC6247368, CC BY 4.0.

To test the specific effects of hypnosis on the attentional components of visual awareness, we developed a posthypnotic suggestion for peripheral visual inattention inspired on the “tunnel vision” symptom of the Balint Syndrome. We constructed a dual-target visibility and discrimination paradigm, in which single-digit numerical targets were placed both on the hypnotically affected peripheral space and on the remaining undisturbed central area. Results were 3-fold: (i) when compared to participants of Low hypnotic susceptibility (Lows), highly susceptible participants (Highs) presented decreased subjective visibility; (ii) Highs did not show dual-task interference from peripheral targets (an effect of unconscious processing) during hypnotic suggestion to not attend them, but Lows did; (iii) nevertheless, when asked to execute a discrimination task over these same targets, Highs performed with the same accuracy as Lows. These results suggest that the hypnotic manipulation of visuospatial attention did produce an experiential change in Highs, but not one that could be mapped onto interference at a single (conscious or unconscious) level of processing. Rather, we posit that Highs simultaneously displayed (i) a fluctuation in awareness of peripheral targets coherent with the suggestion and (ii) a control strategy that involved removing hypnotically unattended targets from the task set whenever task instructions would allow for it. In light of these findings, we argue that hypnosis cannot be used as a tool to restrict the processing of otherwise supraliminal stimulation to subliminal levels.

HighlightsHypnosis decreased subjective visual awareness for highly susceptible participants (Highs).However, Highs were still capable of discriminating between hypnotically unattended targets.Suggestion prevented unconscious processes elicited by hypnotically unattended supraliminal targets for Highs.Rather than rendering perception unconscious, we propose suggestion caused Highs to drop hypnotically unattended targets from the task set, but only when doing so didn’t conflict with task instructions.


Introduction

Much has been written about the promising venues of hypnosis as a tool for cognitive research (Oakley and Halligan 2009, Raz 2011). In particular, recent reviews have proposed that hypnotic negative and positive hallucinations would be a valuable asset for the study of consciousness (Kihlstrom 2014; Landry et al. 2014). The rationale behind such affirmation stems mainly from the theoretical claim that hypnosis can alter percept consolidation by fostering a downplay of bottom-up perceptual information while simultaneously privileging the integration of endogenously generated features (Brown and Oakley 2004; Terhune et al. 2017). It has been argued that this top-down dismissal of perceptual information could potentially replace the physical modulation of stimulus energy, customarily used in the creation of preconscious and subliminal perception. It may thus constitute an alternative for the study of unconscious perception, one without the hindrances of physically degraded stimulation (Landry et al. 2014).

However, the exact psychological mechanisms by which hypnosis enacts this top-down control remain a matter of debate (Terhune et al. 2017). In recent years, some authors have proposed that hypnotic responding could be understood as the result of a particular instance of altered attention—more specifically, a form of top-down-driven “selective inattention” (Raz 2005, McLeod 2011; Lifshitz et al. 2012; Terhune et al. 2017). This notion originated from the seminal work of Raz et al., in which the experimenters used a hypnotic alexia suggestion to successfully hamper the Stroop effect (Raz et al. 2005). They concluded that the obtained results implied a detour of the otherwise automatic attention allocation that supports both the reading process and the semantic processing of words (MacLeod 1991; Neely 1991).

While the aforementioned work generated new avenues of research pertaining the effects of hypnosis over automatic attention allocation and the cancellation/conciliation of cognitive conflict (Raz 2004; Raz et al. 2006; Terhune et al. 2010; Augustinova and Ferrand 2012), a finer-grained study of the effects of hypnotic suggestion, induction, and hypnotizability over the entire spectrum of cognitive mechanisms that compose attention remains direly needed. We have to date little knowledge as to how the concrete temporal and spatial dynamics of attention unravel during hypnotic responding, and the limits of how much (or how little) hypnosis can tamper with attentional resources are yet unclear (Terhune et al. 2017). These are questions with important ramifications, as models of consciousness such as the Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) consider attention to play a key role in allowing stimuli into awareness (Dehaene et al. 2006).

In particular, a part of the experimental work sustaining the GNW account of consciousness has leveraged on spatial attention limitations, exploiting them in order to modulate awareness and task performance: paradigms aimed at eliciting unconscious perception would typically demand participants to fixate on the center of a blank screen while simultaneously requiring them to detect or discriminate peripheral targets. By adding peripheral masks and regulating peripheral stimulus onset, such paradigms could be attuned to test for task performance, priming effects, and both objective and subjective visibility in the periphery (Del Cul et al. 2006, Reuter et al. 2007, but see also Thibault et al. 2016). The rationale behind this manipulations relied on the fact that spatial attention capacity for selective improvement of processing is limited by its own resolution (Intriligator and Cavanagh 2001). This is particularly the case in parafoveal and extrafoveal areas, where attentional resolution drops as the targets distance from the fovea increases.

Uncovering therefore to what extent hypnosis can constrain or expand spatial attention selectively would constitute a fundamental step in the process of establishing how hypnotic suggestion may prevent otherwise supraliminal stimuli from becoming conscious. In this vein, the present work has specifically targeted visuospatial attention through posthypnotic suggestion, with the purpose of hampering subjective visibility and probing the extent to which hypnotically unattended information could be processed. We replaced masking and other forms of physically diminishing stimulus energy by our posthypnotic suggestion: a hypnotic instruction to not attend the periphery, inspired on the “tunnel vision” effect from the Balint Syndrome (Edgette and Edgette 1995). While of course our posthypnotic suggestion is not intended to exactly reproduce the pathology, pathology-inspired suggestions for the study of hypnotic visual attention are not unprecedented (Oakley and Halligan 2009, Priftis et al. 2011).

Only a handful of studies to date have actually explored the workings of hypnotic inattention and its specificity when applied to visual awareness and subjective visibility. Efforts pursued to elicit full “hypnotic blindness” through suggestion (Bryant and McConkey 1989a,b) deserve a mention. Despite producing what highly hypnotizable subjects reported as the incapacity to see full-energy stimulation, and the clear potential such cognitive distortion could represent for the study of conscious awareness (Bryant and McConkey 1989b), by and large the existing studies have not targeted spatial attention specifically as the present work. Furthermore, participants have rarely been asked to perform a task dependent upon the blinded target, and while on some occasions objective measurements were taken (e.g. response times), the evaluation of the blindness itself has been mostly based on non-controlled subjective reports, which may be explained by non-hypnotic responses to demand characteristics (Mallard and Bryant 2001).

Through a “hemispatial neglect-inspired” hypnotic suggestion, Oakley and Halligan (2009) have managed to reproduce the symptoms of the hemineglect syndrome on a single “hypnosis virtuoso” participant but did not test for any kind of unconscious processing in the hypnotically neglected visual field (an ideal confirmatory measure, as it has already been shown that neglected spaces elicit different levels of unconscious processing; see Sackur et al. 2008). Priftis et al. (2011) developed Oakley and Halligan’s idea further, and implemented a “visual neglect hypnotic suggestion” on a number of participants highly susceptible to hypnosis, by explicitly demanding them to direct their visuospatial attention to only one side of their visual space. By having the participants perform a simple detection task while undergoing suggested posthypnotic effects, their results pointed out the neglecting of stimuli in the opposite side of the attended space: while very far from actual blindness or total lack of awareness, Priftis et al.’s participants did show significantly slower response times for the neglected stimuli. The Oakley and Halligan’s study was clinically inspired and evaluated subjective visual awareness only through broad phenomenological tests. On the other hand, Priftis et al.’s work did not directly test visual awareness but used response time as a proxy instead.

On a more recent note, Schmidt et al. (2017) implemented a slight variation of hypnotic blindness paradigms by hypnotically suggesting to their participants that their visual field was obstructed by a wooden board. Participants then wore an EEG net and were asked to solve an oddball task while under the influence of this suggestion, and while their actual visibility was not impaired, highly susceptible individuals showed a negative mean difference of 20% in performance. Furthermore, while Highs did not show any significant changes in the early physiological components typically associated with this kind of task (N1, P2), they did show a reduced P3b amplitude.

However, none of the previous studies considered if the unfolding sequence of processing that in normal circumstances progresses from unconscious to conscious mental activity was somehow prevented by hypnotic suggestion, causing perception to stop before emergence of awareness and if so does it continue to unfold unconsciously. Furthermore, they did not differentiate between the effects of induction and suggestion as distinct components of hypnosis. This differentiation, crucial for the correct understanding of hypnotic response and addressed by only a handful of studies, is fundamental inasmuch as existing evidence for the role of induction in suggestion-specific effects is preliminary at best (Terhune and Cardeña 2016). In the present work, we displayed peripheral targets at five different fixed durations (0 for a control baseline, i.e. no target, 16, 33, 67, and 84 ms) to probe for their visibility at various levels of stimulus energy. The core of this experiment was designed along the lines of classical hypnotic manipulations, i.e. a contrast between groups of High and Low hypnotic susceptibility. However, as an additional measure, we have proceeded to recruit a second group of highly susceptible participants and had them perform the experiment under the effect of the same suggestion, but in the absence of hypnotic induction [The decision of focusing on highly hypnotizable participants alone for this manipulation stemmed from two particular reasons. Firstly, because of the nature of hypnotizability measurements: hypnotizability scoring attributes the lowest grades to individuals who show little to no response in the face of several different types of hypnotic suggestion already within the context of an hypnotic induction (Shor et al. 1962; Anlló et al. 2017). Hence, we deemed it unlikely that Low hypnotizability participants would provide us with a richer, contrastable hypnotic response in the absence of induction. Secondly, because of highly susceptible individuals’ responsiveness: indeed, one of the main reasons why the relevance of hypnotic induction has been put into question has been the existence of experiments in which highly susceptible participants have reacted to suggestion in the absence of induction (see Terhune et al. 2016 for a review; see Raz et al. 2006; Augustinova and Ferrand 2012 as examples)]. We decided to perform this additional step in order to establish what, if any, where the palpable differences elicited by hypnotic induction in highly susceptible participants, whose response has already been argued to be potentially independent of the latter, and more likely linked to susceptibility.


Materials and procedures


Stimuli, task structure

Each stimulus consisted of a single black digit (2, 4, 7, and 9) of 0.8° of size on a uniform gray background (24.6 cd/m2). Stimuli were displayed in dark gray (18.4 cd/m2) when presented as the central target, and in lighter gray (21.4 cd/m2) when presented as peripheral targets, yielding respective Weber contrasts of −0.25 and −0.13. A central elliptical hollow placeholder (2°× 1.8°) was displayed in black. Four dot-shaped gray pointers were set in each quadrant at a distance of 4° from fixation, at the positions of potential peripheral targets (The value of gray utilized for peripheral stimuli and pointers derived of a pilot study featuring the same task as on the third block of the main study, but at multiple contrasts and durations. We used the method of constant stimuli to determine that peripheral targets of -.13 contrast would yield mean 71% accuracy across participants for the categorization task with a target duration of 67 ms. For further detail, refer to). All stimulation was prepared and displayed with the Psychophysics Toolbox for Matlab (Brainard 1997; Pelli 1997; Kleiner et al. 2007).

All trials presented an identical structure, consisting of a peripheral target of variable duration (0 for a control baseline, i.e. no target, 16, 33, 67, and 84 ms) displayed after a random jitter of between 1 and 1.5 s from trial onset, at either one of the four pointers, and immediately followed by a central target of fixed duration (50 ms) displayed at the center of a central ellipse. Importantly, this central ellipse was defined during the posthypnotic and non-hypnotic suggestions as a space free of all inattention effects, “inside of the tunnel” (see for the full suggestion procedure). Immediately after stimuli presentation, the central ellipse flickered briefly to indicate that a response was expected. The trials were split into four blocks of 140 stimuli, with stimuli identity, duration, and position fully balanced within blocks. The task changed from block to block: in Block OC (Objective Central task), participants had to perform a discrimination task assessing if the Central Target was either greater or smaller than 5, by pressing the L or the M key on a standard AZERTY French keyboard with their right hand (relabeled for clarity). This block was conceived to test any possible priming elicited by the peripheral stimulus, as well as to test if hypnosis had any unintended effects on either accuracy or response times for the hypnotically “spared” targets. In Block SP (Subjective Peripheral task), participants were asked to evaluate the visibility of the Peripheral Targets through a perceptual awareness scale (PAS, Ramsøy and Overgaard 2004) ranging from 1 to 4, using their left hand on the Q, S, D and F keys (relabeled for clarity): “1” represented no experience of visibility, “2” a brief non-specific glimpse, “3” an almost clear experience of visibility, and “4” full visibility. This block was designed for evaluating peripheral subjective visibility, as a means for testing whether perceptual changes followed the content of the hypnotic suggestion. In Block OP (Objective Peripheral task), participants had to perform the discrimination task on the Peripheral Targets, with their right hand. The rationale behind this task was to test if highly susceptible participants were able to execute the task in a condition of reduced subjective visual awareness. Finally, in block OCSP (Objective Central task, Subjective Peripheral tasks), participants had to perform the discrimination task on the Central Target, and immediately afterwards, the Subjective Visibility task on the Peripheral Targets. This block was meant to test for congruency effects between peripheral and central targets when both were task-relevant and attended. Additionally, this block was designed to test if by paying attention at the same time to peripheral targets (which are affected by the posthypnotic suggestion) and central targets (spared by the posthypnotic suggestion), we would observe any hypnotic spillover effects over the central task.


Participants

Participation was voluntary, in exchange of 15 € for a 1-h 30-min session. Participants were all contacted by e-mail and recruited by a research assistant independent to the study, from a database of volunteers previously screened with the French Norms of the HGSHS: A (Shor and Orne 1962; Anlló et al. 2017). Participants intervening in the High vs. Low hypnotic susceptibility contrast were told that they would take part of an experiment that would include their response to hypnotic suggestion and advised since first contact that all levels of susceptibility were equally relevant, equally important, and equally desirable for the experimenters. In the case of participants recruited for the No Induction group, no mention of hypnosis was made at all at during the procedure or at any point of the recruitment process.

A total of 24 right-handed, native French speakers aged between 19 and 35 (mean 24.8, SD: 3.41, 19 female) participated in the main contrast (High vs. Low hypnotic susceptibility): 12 participants highly susceptible to hypnosis (Harvard score 8–12, mean score 10, SD: 1), 12 of Low susceptibility (score 0–4, mean score 1.3, SD: 1) [In the reference material, i.e. the French Norms for the HGSHS:A (Anlló et al. 2017), the top 44.3% of the sample scored 8 or above in the corrected scale of susceptibility, and the bottom 29.5% scored 4 or below. We decided to make sure that our results were not then a product of the hypnotizability spread, particularly in Study 2 where one could worry that the Induction effect could actually respond to an hypnotizability difference between both High groups. In order to do so, we reran our model for Study 2, but only selecting the participants of both groups that had a Harvard score of 9 or 10 (5 participants for the No Induction group, 9 for the Induction group). Our results replicated the same differences observed in the original findings, all statistically significant (main Peripheral Target duration effect P < 0.0001, main Induction effect P < 0.0001, interaction between Peripheral Target duration and Induction P < 0.0001)]. Participants were called by an independent research assistant and tested in a random order, as to prevent the hypnosis practitioner from knowing their hypnotic susceptibility scores in advance.

For the Hypnotic Induction vs. No Hypnotic Induction contrast, an additional group of right-handed, native French speakers (mean age 24.3, 15 female) of all hypnotizability scores were recruited for preparing the No Induction control group. Participants of medium and High hypnotic susceptibility were summoned to participate of the experiments by an independent research assistant in a random order, as means of preventing the hypnosis practitioner from knowing about their hypnotic susceptibility. Once all experimental sessions were concluded, participant hypnotizability was made available to the first author, and the seven participants who presented High hypnotic susceptibility were retained for analysis as the No Induction group. Once all experimental sessions were concluded, participant hypnotizability was made available and the seven participants who presented High hypnotic susceptibility (mean age 24.14, SD: 4, 7 female, mean Harvard score 9, SD: 1) were retained in the No Induction group.

All participants signed a written consent allowing for the anonymous exploitation of the data they produced. The experiment was conducted in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Université Paris Descartes (Paris 5).


Hypnotic induction and suggestion

The hypnotic induction consisted of a shortened variation of the gaze-fixation induction from the French Norms for the Harvard Group Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility (Shor and Orne 1962; Anlló et al. 2017). The posthypnotic suggestion that ensued was based on the symptomatology of the Balint Syndrome (see for the full induction and suggestion procedures), and expressed in terms of attention, attention direction, and attentional modulation. The intended effect of this hypnotic procedure was to produce a visually unattended space outside of the central elliptical placeholder, ideally rendering “negligible” any stimuli present outside of this area. The first author, who is a licensed clinical hypnosis practitioner, constructed and administered both the induction and the suggestion while ignoring participant’s hypnotizability scores, but by design was not blind to the experimental condition (Induction or No Induction), as he was the experimenter and the hypnosis practitioner.

The suggestion for the No Induction control group was as similar as possible to the one implemented with hypnotized participants, as to elicit similar degrees of motivation and instruction, but without any hypnotic references. This suggestion was also administered by the first author, who was again blind to the hypnotizability of the participants until after the post-test interview. See for the full induction and suggestion procedures.


Procedure

Participants sat in a dim-lit, soundproof test booth, equipped with a headset, a calibrated standard LCD screen, a chinrest fixed at 60 cm from the screen, at a height that assured that the participants’ resting gaze fell at the center of the screen. A standard keyboard for inputting responses was provided. Participants underwent then a Training phase consisting of a short version of each of the four blocks (25 trials per block). Crucially, after explaining the specific instructions for the blocks, participants were warned that at any given trial peripheral targets could be displayed “fast enough to seem completely absent,” but that a response was mandatory even if they felt like they were guessing. Participants were instructed to keep their gaze fixated on the center of the ellipse at all times, even when expected to perform a task on Peripheral Targets. Those who could not reach at least 90% accuracy on the OC task and 70% accuracy in the OP task, for durations of 67 and 84 ms, were to be discarded (none were). Participants were instructed to respond as fast as possible at all moments of the test, but never at the sake of their precision. Upon completion of the training phase, participants underwent the hypnotic induction and posthypnotic suggestion, or simply the suggestion, depending on the testing session. In order to trigger the posthypnotic suggestion into effect, the suggestion script stated that “as you return your head to the chinrest and fixate your gaze at the center of the ellipse, immediately your attention will focus on the inside of the ellipse and whatever happens inside of it, to the extent of rendering whatever may happen outside of it completely negligible, even invisible.” After suggestion delivery, the experimenter performed the scripted partial de-induction process, asked the participants to wear the designated audio headset, and left the room. Through the audio headset, participants were instructed by a recorded voice, clearly different from the experimenter’s, to adopt the position and place their head on the chinrest (as the experimenter verified through an obscured side window). Once in position, the recording announced the beginning of the experiment, explained the main tasks again and introduced each block as it came by repeating its instructions. Participants had to acknowledge proper understanding of the recorded instructions by pressing the “H” key for the block to start, or could choose to listen to the instructions again by pressing the “J” key (both relabeled for clarity). After the experiment, participants were de-induced and told to regain their normal awareness, and then debriefed and casually asked to be honest about their hypnotic experience. None of them reported any faking or “forcing” of the suggestion effects.


Results


Statistical analyses

We performed data analysis using R (R Core Team 2014). Response times and accuracy were modeled by implementing (generalized) linear mixed models, with a random intercept per participant (lme4, Bates et al. 2015). We selected this approach because of its numerous advantages, the main one being that the implementation of random intercepts per participant would allow us to control for individual variability in hypnotic responding. Fitting via maximum likelihood estimation typically ensures optimal properties of the estimators (Agresti 2013). We performed significance tests by means of likelihood ratio test that compared our models to simpler models, in which the relevant predictor was removed (null model). This model comparison approach enables us to provide some evidence for null effects, in case the null model is shown to provide a better fit (see below).

We compared models including as predictors Hypnotizability (levels: High, Low), Peripheral Target Duration (levels: 0, 16, 33, 67, 84 ms), Congruency between Targets (levels: Congruous (both stimuli below or above 5), Incongruous), Hypnotizability Score (levels: 1 to 12), and Block Type (levels: OC, SP, OP, OCSP). Selection of the best model was performed through likelihood ratio tests and based on Bayesian Information Criterion (Pinheiro and Bates 2000; Bolker et al. 2009). For each analysis, only the effects based on the best models are reported. ANOVA tables were computed through Analysis of Deviance (Type II Wald χ2 test), and post hoc pairwise comparisons through Tukey contrasts of least-squares means (0.95 CI) (car and lsmeans R packages, Fox and Weisberg 2011 and Lenth 2016, respectively). For proving actual lack of effects for given contrasts, we calculated the Bayesian Information Criterion approximation to the Bayes Factor for the full and null models originally implicated in said contrasts [BIC approximation to BF, so that BF = exp((BICfull-BICnull)/2), see Wagenmakers (2007)].

For each analysis, the full list of tested models with their respective Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) is provided as.


Liminality of peripheral targets

We decided to consider as subliminal or not perceptible all Peripheral Target categories in which participants’ objective discrimination task performance and visibility scores would be indistinguishable from control baseline (i.e. absence of Peripheral Target). We found that under this definition only the 17 ms category could be considered as subliminal. We arrived to this conclusion first by constructing four different linear models with participants as random intercept: each of these models estimated Subjective Visibility as a function of Hypnotizability (Low/High) and Peripheral Target Duration and their interaction. Each of these models consisted of only the trials corresponding to the baseline condition (0 ms, i.e. absence of Peripheral Targets) and the trials of one of the remaining four levels of the Peripheral Target Duration factor (17, 33, 67, and 84 ms). Comparing all models to their respective null models (which did not consider Peripheral Target Duration as a predictor), we found that Peripheral Target duration had a significant influence on Visibility (P < 0.01) for all models except the one that considered trials of 0 ms and 17 ms. When computing the difference in Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) between this model in particular and its null, we found that the model that did not consider Peripheral Target duration as a predictor had a smaller BIC and was strongly favored by the BF computation (ΔBIC = 15.4; BF = 1480).

We then proceeded to do the same for the Objective Peripheral block data, and found the same results, again setting apart the model that comprised the 0 ms and 17 ms durations. On these bases, we established 17 ms trials to be subliminal (“unseen” mean subjective experience, indistinguishable performance from control), and the rest as supraliminal.


Subjective visibility in the periphery diminishes for High participants

Subjective visibility was measured through the implementation of a PAS ranging from 1 to 4, both in a single-task (block SP) and double-task framework (block OCSP). As displayed in, visibility increased globally with the rise in stimulus energy (Peripheral Target Duration main effect, χ2 = 2904, DF = 3, P < 0.0001), but the differences in visibility between High and Low participants increased as a function of Target duration (Low Group > High Group; interaction Hypnotizability × Peripheral Target Duration χ2 = 8, DF = 3, P < 0.05). These results fell within expectation, as they showed that the hampering effects of the posthypnotic suggestion were modulated coherently by hypnotizability. It should be noted however that this interaction did not hold (P > 0.08, BF = 40.7) if one looked only at the difference between 33 and 67 ms (near-threshold values), which could indicate that our effect appeared to be mainly due to an interaction with liminality. We tested the statistical significance of these effects by means of a regression with factors of Congruency, Peripheral Target Duration and Hypnotizability, over pooled SP and OCSP blocks, since evidence favored the model which lacked the Block factor (ΔBIC = 15). See full results in.

The data collected from the No Induction testing session allowed us to evaluate the impact of hypnotic induction for highly susceptible participants. As displayed in, subjective visibility increased globally with stimulus energy (Peripheral Target Duration main effect, χ2 = 3099, DF = 3, P < 0.0001) and decreased with Induction implementation (No Induction > Induction, Induction main effect χ2 = 5, DF = 1, P < 0.05). We also observed that the difference in subjective visibility between Induction and No Induction groups increased as a function of increased stimulus energy (No Induction > Induction, interaction Induction implementation × Peripheral Target Duration χ2 = 117, DF = 3, P < 0.0001). Overall, these findings point to the fact that the introduction of a hypnotic induction further hampered subjective visibility, even more so for high-energy stimuli. In this case, the interaction held even when only looking at the difference between 33 and 67 ms (near-threshold values, P < 0.001).

We tested the statistical significance of these effects by means of a regression with factors of Congruency, Peripheral Target Duration, and Induction implementation, over pooled SP and OCSP blocks. Full results can be found in.

Faced with a significant visibility difference in favor of the No Induction High participants, we proceeded to compare their visibility judgements with those of the Induction Low participants from Study 1. As indicated in, as stimulus energy rose, the suggestion for visual inattention hindered the subjective awareness of High (No Induction) participants less than for Low (Induction) participants, despite their High hypnotic susceptibility [High (No Induction) > Low (Induction), interaction Hypnotizability × Peripheral Target Duration χ2 = 64, DF = 3, P < 0.0001].

We tested the statistical significance of these effects by means of a regression with factors of Congruency, Peripheral Target Duration, and Hypnotizability [levels: High (No Induction), Low (Induction)], over pooled SP and OCSP blocks as with the original dataset. Full results can be found in.


Suggestion impairs priming effects stemming from the periphery for High participants

The question remained of whether hypnotic inattention was only active at the subjective level or if it impaired cognitive processing of stimuli. To answer this question, we turned to the investigation of priming effects between the peripheral and central stimuli. Because of trial structure, Peripheral Targets worked as primes for the Central Target in blocks OC and OCSP. As shown in, the accuracy difference between Congruent and Incongruent trials was significantly larger for Lows than for Highs (Congruent > Incongruent, interaction Hypnotizability × Congruency, χ2 = 4, DF = 1, P < 0.05). Moreover, congruency did not appear to play a role at all in modulating accuracy for High participants (P > 0.08, BIC approximation to BF = 40.4 in favor of the null model). We tested the statistical significance of this effect by means of a binomial regression on accuracy with factors of Congruency and Hypnotizability, over pooled OC and OCSP blocks. Full results are in.

For further verification, we repeated the analysis utilizing raw hypnotizability scores of all participants as a regressor, rather than the Group Type factor, and replicated the result, i.e. difference in performance for incongruous and congruous trials increased in inverse relation to hypnotizability (Congruence × Individual Hypnotizability Score, χ2 = 4, DF = 1, P < 0.05). Overall our results point to the fact that when processing the central stimulus, highly hypnotizable individuals seem to be shielded from the influence of the peripheral stimulus, contrary to Low hypnotizable individuals.

As for the Induction vs. No Induction contrast within High responders, as shown in, a binomial regression on accuracy with factors of Congruency and Induction implementation did not reflect any interactions or main effects. Furthermore, the BIC approximation to BF taking the Induction factor as a predictor of accuracy favored the null model decisively (BF = 3964). Given the small sample size of the High No Induction condition, and considering that the BIC “penalizes” more complex models when n < 8 (James et al. 2013), we also used the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The AIC also favored the null model as the better fit (ΔAIC = 4).

When considered together with the results from the previous contrast (Highs vs Lows under posthypnotic suggestion), the fact that hypnotic induction would have no effect of its own over congruency-related effects suggested that the shielding from the peripheral target depends on suggestion and hypnotic susceptibility alone. Additionally, the lack of impact of hypnotic induction on the accuracy of the central discrimination task implied that the general relaxation suggestions and mental imagery evoked by the induction procedure did not have any non-specific effects over the task that they were intended to spare.


Posthypnotic suggestion did not impair discrimination of peripheral targets for High participants compared to Low participants

In Study 1, we found that highly hypnotizable individuals responded to the attentional suggestion by manifesting a reduced subjective visibility of peripheral targets, as well as a lack of priming effects. In order to evaluate how these hypnotically induced changes impacted objective task performance, Block OP was designed to provide evidence on whether highly susceptible participants would be able to execute a discrimination task on these same peripheral, hypnotically unattended targets, on par with Low susceptibility participants. Results displayed in show that irrespective of subjective awareness differences, High participants were nevertheless able to perform the task with better-than-chance accuracy. In addition, unlike blocks OCSP and OC, performance was significantly worse for incongruous trials also for highly susceptible participants (Congruent > Incongruent, main effect of Congruency, χ2 = 71, DF = 1, P < 0.0001), even though the difference effect was indeed more pronounced for Low participants (interaction between Hypnosis × Congruency, χ2 = 18, DF = 1, P < 0.0001; Tukey pairwise Congruency contrasts for Hypnotizability; High P < 0.05, Low P < 0.0001). We tested these effects with a model with Peripheral Target Duration, Congruency, and Hypnotizability as regressors for accuracy. Full results are in.


Discussion

We administered a posthypnotic suggestion for selective inattention to High and Low hypnotic susceptibility participants, inspired by the “tunnel vision” symptom of the Balint Syndrome. We set out to evaluate how the creation of an “unattended visual space” would successfully degrade subjective visibility and modulate information treatment at different levels of stimulus energy and hypnotizability. We did so through a single/double-task design, which asked for visibility judgments and target discrimination, and placed targets in the center of the visual field, outside the influence of the suggestion, and closer to its periphery, within the influence of the suggestion. This allowed us to both evaluate the efficacy and specificity of the posthypnotic suggestion, as well as its interference with any priming or congruency effects between peripheral and central targets. Additionally, we utilized the same paradigm, and set out to observe the same phenomena, but in connection to the specific influence of hypnotic induction on highly susceptible participants.

Our main findings are 3-fold. First, the contrast between High and Low susceptibility participants showed that our standard posthypnotic suggestion could hamper Highs’ subjective visibility (when compared to Lows’). This was particularly relevant, as it confirmed that the hypnotic procedure had successfully affected the participants’ visual experience in a way consistent with the content of the posthypnotic suggestion. We propose that such a difference in subjective visibility could be interpreted in terms of a difference in awareness, inasmuch as reportability and cognitive accessibility are regarded in many preponderant theories of consciousness as an index of awareness (Kouider 2009; Kouider et al. 2010). The actual nature of these changes in visual awareness, however, were not consistent with displacement of the perceptual threshold for access to consciousness (Del Cul et al. 2007), as there is no impact of hypnosis on subjective visibility at intermediate, near-threshold durations (33 and 67 ms, P > 0.08, BF = 40.7). Rather, we propose, they were the result of a belated, control-related process. Indeed, our results have shown that immediate basic perceptual processing did not depend of participant hypnotizability (with peripheral liminality being the same for all participant groups), and that this parity did not prevent the emergence of subjective visibility differences dependent of hypnotizability that hinged on the increase of stimulus energy. In other words, we posit that Highs found their awareness obscured by the posthypnotic suggestion only as stimulus energy rose and targets became perceptually accessible (supraliminal).

Additionally, we find this interaction to constitute as well a favorable argument against attributing the reported effects solely to expectations, or demand characteristics unrelated to hypnosis. Namely, if the Low hypnotizability group had approached the task with the expectation of responding to show a conserved full visibility, these participants would have likely overestimated visibility for lower stimulus energy targets. Conversely, if the High hypnotizability group had approached the task with the opposite expectation, then visibility would be expected to plateau instead of continuing to rise with increasing stimulus energy. Finally, both the thesis for a late, control-related effect and the argument against solely non-hypnotic effects of demand characteristics, were strengthened by the fact that our results showed hypnotic induction to extend this diminishment of visibility also in relation to stimulus energy.

It should be noted at this point that many early studies on the nature of hypnotic induction have found the latter to bear little to no impact on hypnotic responding (Hilgard and Tart 1966; Braffman and Kirsch 1999). Our findings, on the other hand, support the opposing conclusion. Results from the present work have shown that highly susceptible individuals who went through a non-hypnotic suggestion manifested a higher subjective visibility score than Low susceptibility participants who underwent hypnotic induction and hypnotic suggestion. We consider this to be a relevant contribution concerning the study of hypnotic induction, one far from being particularly odd in light of recent discoveries. First, several authors consider that the traditional definition of Low susceptibility individuals as people impervious to hypnosis and paragon of non-hypnotic normality could be the result of confirmation bias. To quote a recent review on new perspectives of hypnosis research, by Jensen et al. (page 6): “In studies comparing lows and highs (e.g. Horton et al. 2004), the findings cannot always be properly interpreted; for example, it is not possible to determine if any between-group differences found are due to highs being atypical or lows being atypical (Lynn et al. 2007).” Secondly, clinical studies have shown that when given the proper motivation and the right set of expectations [which, incidentally, is for some the main role of hypnotic induction (see Terhune et al. 2017 for a review)] participants considered as Low could respond to hypnotic suggestion (Orne et al. 1996). Finally, recent neuroimaging studies have shown that particularly when it comes to suggested phenomenological changes, induction can play a major role in hypnotic responding, and that its distinctive and specific effects are traceable in the brain (Derbyshire et al. 2009; McGeown et al. 2012). Regrettably, such a performance on behalf of the Low group shows that a design including a contrast between Induced and Non-Induced Lows would have been more fruitful for a better understanding of the actual role of Induction.

The second set of main findings stemming from our results concern the impact of our posthypnotic suggestion on priming. Our results have shown that highly hypnotizable participants remained impervious to the influence of incongruent primes in the periphery for the central discrimination task, while the Low hypnotic susceptibility group did not. These results expanded our understanding of the specific information treatment caused by hypnotic inattention, particularly in connection to the question of whether utilizing hypnosis as a device would warrant subliminal or preconscious processing (Landry et al. 2014). The reported reduced subjective awareness of peripheral primes manifested by the High group would have been promising in this precise sense if it had also elicited any unconscious stimulus treatment, comparable to that of subliminal or pre-attentive stimulation (e.g. strong priming effects stemming from the hypnotically affected periphery for highly susceptible participants, paired with across-the-board reduced subjective visibility). Yet, our results showed that, at least within the context of this paradigm, highly susceptible participants disregarded hypnotically unattended peripheral information and did not use it, preventing it from influencing the central target task. While these results may discourage the idea of implementing hypnotic suggestions as a replacement for physical stimuli suppression techniques such as masking, they do however contribute to the literature questioning the automaticity of priming effects and the latter’s susceptibility to cognitive control (Kunde 2003; Kunde et al. 2003; Kiesel et al. 2005; Kiesel et al. 2007; Kiefer et al. 2012). While classical theories of automaticity assume that automatic processes elicited by unconscious stimuli are autonomous and independent of higher-level cognitive influences, the aforementioned findings bring forward evidence that unconscious visual processing is automatic only in the sense that it is initiated without deliberate intention, but susceptible to attentional top-down control and only elicited if the cognitive system is “configured accordingly” (Most et al. 2005; Kiefer et al. 2012). Attentional influences on priming depend not only on attentional resources but can also be modulated through stimulus expectations, intentions, and task sets (Kiefer et al. 2012). We suggest that posthypnotic-induced inattention attenuated priming processes stemming from the periphery for highly susceptible individuals as a result of a late, high-order manipulation, likely originated at the level of cognitive control. Rather than producing a perceptual lack of vision, the posthypnotic suggestion led highly susceptible participants to actively (albeit not purposefully) execute the task of “not seeing” through the top-down process of dis-attending to selected information. Results from the induction contrast reinforced this idea: the fact that priming effects were sensitive to hypnotic susceptibility but not to induction could point to the fact that, for highly hypnotizable individuals, direct suggestion is sufficient, and probably bears the same weight as task instructions when it comes to top-down designation of relevant information and its unconscious processing. This idea could also explain why hypnotic induction failed to have an influence over accuracy for the blocks OC and OCSP, but did alter the posthypnotic effects in subjective visibility for blocks SP and OCSP. Designating the relevance of peripheral stimuli could be conceived as a binary judgment (either relevant or irrelevant) that can be biased sufficiently through suggestion alone (before even starting the task, at suggestion). Visibility, on the other hand, was a gradual judgment to be established in situ (during each trial) amidst the contradiction between the suggestion, instructional content and variable physical energy. We think that in this condition, participants were more likely to be biased by the cumulative motivational and phenomenal changes warranted by the induction.

The third and last main set of findings from this study pertain to the objective discrimination task over hypnotically affected peripheral targets. Our results have shown that when probed by an objective peripheral task, both High and Low participants were able to perform the task despite the suggestion, and that they were vulnerable to backward contaminating information from the central stimulus. This finding is of relevance (i) because it confirmed the specificity of the posthypnotic suggestion, as the suggestion did not prescribe any restrictive effects for the central targets and (ii) because the extent to which High and Low participants were under the contaminating influence of the central stimulus was different. The fact that the performance differences between congruent and incongruent trials were smaller for highly susceptible participants was consistent with the growing body of literature identifying highly susceptible participants as better at reducing cognitive conflict (Raz et al. 2005, see Terhune et al. 2017 for a review), or rather, would suggest that highly susceptible participants as better at optimizing response production in the face of cognitive conflict [We find this second approach much more precise, as it allows us to acknowledge findings such as those by Egner et al. (2005), where highly susceptible participants showed higher activation of the dorsolateral ACC, known as an important part of the conflict network (when compared to Low susceptibility). Hence, what we propose is not that cognitive conflict is reduced per se, but rather, dealt with more efficiently. We posit that dACC increased activity would be a reflection of this improved conflict resolution scheme for highly susceptible individuals]. Indeed, by being able to better reconcile the contradictory/incongruent influence of the central stimulus over the peripheral target information, highly susceptible participants outperformed Low susceptibility participants on incongruent trials. A final point of importance to consider was the fact that (iii) Highs managed to perform on par with Low participants for congruent trials altogether, despite simultaneously reporting lesser visibility for the subjective visibility task. A weak interpretation of these results would imply that the suggestion managed to reduce subjective visibility, but not enough to have a real impact over objective performance. A stronger interpretation would imply that since the task was of the forced-choice variety, Highs’ performance in the face of reduced awareness was supplemented by the unaware treatment of the “hypnotically less-attended” peripheral targets. Post-session interviews tended to support the stronger view, with highly susceptible participants invariably reporting the impression of seeing “next-to-nothing” in the periphery, and manifesting little to no confidence regarding their performance over peripheral targets.

In all, these findings provide a consistent picture of the effects of hypnotic inattention as a tool for hampering subjective visibility and cognitive processing in a top-down fashion. In particular, they have allowed us to identify and separate the mechanisms by which posthypnotic induction and suggestion hampered visual awareness and reduced cognitive conflict. One mechanism, susceptible to the influence of hypnotic induction and dependent on hypnotizability that intervened belatedly into reshaping the subjective awareness of affected stimuli and was all the more present the higher stimulus energy was. And another top-down mechanism, potentially impervious to induction, dependent on the instructional content of suggestion, similar (if not homologous) to task instructions set, that mediated the attribution of relevance to certain segments of the visual space for particular tasks in a way that was congruous with both the suggested hypnotic effects and the task demands. Crucially, this last mechanism did not render stimuli unconscious. Instead, we propose it preemptively affected peripheral target processing: whenever task instructions did not call for these targets explicitly, Highs dropped them from the task set as per suggestion content (Most et al. 2005; Kiefer et al. 2012). This same results attest to the cognitive flexibility of highly susceptible participants, at both handling incongruent semantic information and the conflict elicited between suggestion (e.g. “ignore the target”) and task instructions (e.g. “perform a task over the target”), by always privileging performance.

Finally, it should be mentioned that our results could arguably limit the possibilities of implementing hypnosis as a classic subliminal masking tool, as purported by some theoretical reviews in the field (Kihlstrom 2014; Landry et al. 2014). Rather than physically causing perception to stop or deviate before emergence of awareness, hypnotic perceptual, and cognitive alterations respond to a balance between suggestion, expectation, and task instructions, leading the highly hypnotizable individual to integrate the three in the form of high-order regulations that privilege conflict reduction. Hypnosis does not seem like a suitable tool for simply restricting the processing of an otherwise supraliminal stimulus to the subliminal level. The more susceptible individuals may be, the more they may be able to flexibly adapt to suggestion and task instructions, giving rise to effects phenomenologically similar to traditional masking, but clearly not the same, as suggestion has been demonstrated here to interfere with the unconscious processing that normally precedes or accompanies conscious awareness of the target stimulus.

The effect of hypnotic suggestion over performance worked through top-down control; more precisely, we propose, through the impact that suggestion had over the task attentional set. Indeed, our posthypnotically induced spatial inattention experiment showed that while certain hypnotic components such as hypnotic induction had a strong effect over late subjective markers (such as visual awareness), low-level automatic processing could only be altered a priori and indirectly, through the kind of broad, goal-oriented high-order control usually attributed to cognitive strategy. The lack of semantic priming stemming from the hypnotically unattended targets strengthened this idea: rather than having a direct incidence on sensory processing (as physical masking does), the posthypnotic suggestion fostered the strategic dismissal of the perceptual information.

With this fact in mind, we could very prudently posit a rudimental cognitive model of hypnotic responding as a two-tier process. On one tier, the suggestion would actualize the task set, provoking attention to be driven towards the hypnotically targeted components. We posit that this would happen independently of what the actual instruction may consist of, independently of how much it could conflict with the pre-existing representational set or the original task instructions, and independently of hypnotic susceptibility. This could explain why, when probed on a task other than peripheral visibility over hypnotically affected targets, High participants showed such high performances, despite their subjective visibility scores. On the other tier, with a variable degree of involuntariness, participants would attempt to manage this new updated task set, which would often hold a contradiction between suggestion content and the original attentional set. Those participants we commonly identify as highly susceptible individuals would be able to privilege the suggested new task set components, and avoid contradiction by updating their cognitive regulation and disengaging from resource-intensive conflict monitoring. Crucially, we propose that they will do so under the umbrella of a subjective phenomenological experience that reflects suggestion content.


Point-of-care brain injury evaluation of conscious awareness: wide scale deployment of portable HCS EEG evaluation

Carolyn M Fleck-Prediger, Sujoy Ghosh Hajra, Careesa C Liu, D Shaun Gray, Donald F Weaver, Shishir Gopinath, Bruce D Dick, Ryan C N D’Arcy — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2018. PMC6251986, CC BY 4.0.

Survivors of severe brain injury may remain in a decreased state of conscious awareness for an extended period of time. Clinical scales are used to describe levels of consciousness but rely on behavioural responses, precipitating misdiagnosis. We have previously utilized event-related potentials (ERPs) to circumvent reliance on behavioural responses. However, practical implementation barriers limit the clinical utility of ERP assessment at point-of-care (POC). To address this challenge, we developed the Halifax Consciousness Scanner (HCS)—a rapid, semi-automated electroencephalography system. The current study evaluated: (i) HCS feasibility in sub-acute, POC settings nationwide; (ii) ERP P300 responses in patients with acquired brain injury versus healthy controls; and (iii) correlations within and between clinical measures and P300 latencies. We assessed 28 patients with severe, chronic impairments from brain injuries and contrasted the results with healthy control data (n = 100). Correlational analyses examined relationships between P300 latencies and the commonly used clinical scales. P300 latencies were significantly delayed in patients compared to healthy controls (P < 0.05). Clinical assessment scores were significantly inter-correlated and correlated significantly with P300 latencies (P < 0.05). In sub-acute and chronic care settings, the HCS provided a physiological measure of neurocognitive processing at POC for patients with severe acquired brain injury, including those with disorders of consciousness.

Keywords: Disorders of Consciousness, EEG, ERP, Halifax Consciousness Scanner, P300


Introduction

After serious neurological injury, patients may die, remain in coma or awaken as evidenced by eye opening. Those who awaken may remain in a state of environmentally unresponsive wakefulness, improve to a minimally conscious state (MCS) with clear but intermittent and inconsistent signs of self and environmental awareness or regain full conscious awareness (Di Perri et al. 2014). Edlow et al. (2017) suggest that early detection of masked consciousness and cortical responses could inform life-altering clinical decision-making. However, medical complications and the related interventions often impede accurate evaluation of consciousness (Giacino et al. 2013). Given these confounds, assessing a patient’s level of consciousness (LOC) too early may misinform clinical decision-making at the top of the critical care cascade. During acute phases, many patients may truly be incapable of functional information processing but in some cases, consciousness gradually recovers. This cognitive recovery can happen with or without the development of motor capacities and behavioural output. In view of this and the fact that subtle changes can go unnoticed in busy long-term care settings, Giacino et al. (2014) stress the importance of an integrated system of care that responds to the needs of patients as they evolve.

Clinical assessments such as the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Teasdale and Jennett 1974) and Coma Recovery Scale-R (CRS-R) (Giacino et al. 2004) rely on the subjective observation of patient responses without considering patient or situational variables (Reith et al. 2016). Scales that are solely based on observation of patient responses misdiagnose certain patients because consciousness can exist without behavioural signs. In fact, as Wijnen et al. (2007) point out, patients who remain in an unresponsive wakeful state do not score worse on early motor-based assessment scales than those who eventually regain some degree of conscious awareness. Andrews et al. (1996) examined patients on a rehabilitation unit with the working diagnosis of vegetative state and found the misdiagnosis rate to be as high as 43%. Importantly, once conscious awareness was detected, nearly all of these patients were able to relay choices regarding quality of life issues using alternate means of communication. Despite the growing recognition of this important problem, Schnakers et al. (2009) showed that the rate of misdiagnosis did not change substantially over the 15-year period following the study by Andrews et al. (1996), remaining at over 40%. This situation underscores the need for objective physiological measurement tools that bridge the gap between research evidence and clinical implementation. Solutions are emerging from brain imaging technologies that track physiological responses and these tactics are being translated to sub-acute rehabilitation settings. Fleck-Prediger et al. (2015) used the HCS in a traumatic brain injury (TBI) case study to evaluate event-related potential (ERP) changes during active speech language rehabilitation. In this single case study, P300 results remained stable while the response size of a later ERP component, the N400, improved in parallel with significant clinical gains in auditory comprehension.

A number of groups, including ours, have used brain imaging technologies such as electroencephalography (EEG)/ERPs, positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to explore Disorders of Consciousness (DoC) (Laureys et al. 2004; Owen et al. 2006; Gawryluk et al. 2010; Casali et al. 2013; Harrison and Connolly 2013; Ragazzoni et al. 2013; Sitt et al. 2014; Bodart et al. 2015; Sabino et al. 2017). While these various brain-imaging technologies have contributed valuable insights, one of the major practical challenges has been clinical implementation in front-line point-of-care (POC) settings. To address this, we developed a portable, semi-automated EEG device, the Halifax Consciousness Scanner (HCS), for user-friendly ERP testing (D'Arcy et al. 2011). The HCS provides an objective, rapid POC approach and has been separately validated across a large sample of healthy controls (Sculthorpe-Petley et al. 2015).

With advances in portable EEG devices, ERPs are increasingly being used to investigate conscious awareness (Hinterberger et al. 2005; Cruse et al. 2011; D'Arcy et al. 2011; Fleck-Prediger et al. 2015; Guger et al. 2017). Emerging from clinical ERP assessment work that began the mid-1990s (Connolly et al. 1995, Connolly and D’Arcy, 2000; D'Arcy et al. 2003; Hajra et al. 2016), the objective of the HCS was to integrate a range of ERP components into a rapid, semi-automated evaluation for POC. Any one or more of these ERP components could then be utilized for neuroscience evaluations from low-level sensation to higher-level language and cognition. With the HCS normative study complete (Sculthorpe-Petley et al. 2015) and preliminary case study evidence (Fleck-Prediger et al. 2015), patient studies that evaluate the practical applications of this ERP assessment across different DoC POC sites are underway to further develop and validate the technology. In this study, the compressed HCS enabled evaluation of the relationship between auditory evoked P300 responses and subjective clinical DoC measures (i.e. rating scales). In order to ensure scientific rigor and avoid spurious conclusions, we purposefully targeted a single robust measure appropriate for complex patient data (i.e. P300 latency). We systematically required the presence of the N100 to validate auditory sensation and then tested the null hypothesis that the P300 latency (as a neural measure of information processing) would not show a significant relationship with the clinical rating scales.

The P300, an objective, physiological measure of information processing, is a positive endogenous component with a prototypical peak 300 ms after stimulus onset, usually between 250 and 500 ms but this range can vary with the stimulus modality (Polich 2007). It is thought to serve as a temporal measure of the neural activity underlying the allocation of attention and immediate memory processes (Polich and Heine 1996). In simple tasks, the P300 amplitude is typically large and its latency is short in duration. However, as task demands increase, the amplitude decreases and the peak latency lengthens because processing resources must be dedicated to task completion (Kok, 2001). Therefore, we anticipate the P300 latency will be delayed in DOC patients (relative to normative data) and will correlate negatively with the patients’ measured state of conscious awareness using standard clinical tests. As Steppacher et al. (2013) have shown, this does not to imply that P300 has significant predictive powers regarding the re-emergence of consciousness. Rather, the intent is to establish the HCS evoked auditory P300 as a neural indicator of information processing in patients with lower levels of conscious awareness.

Research and rehabilitation communities often do not adequately monitor patients over time and therefore may not detect subtle changes in conscious awareness. The need for serial monitoring is based on an emerging understanding that patients can demonstrate substantial recovery over long periods of time. For example, Nakase-Richardson et al. (2012) studied acute and long-term outcomes from DoC and found that two-thirds of patients regained the ability to follow commands during rehabilitation and one-fourth emerged from post-traumatic amnesia. Furthermore, significant recovery continued for 2 years post-injury with more modest gains for as long as 5 years post-injury. We have also reported on a 3-year case control study in which a severe TBI survivor recovered from coma. He demonstrated recovery of motor function and corresponding fMRI activation changes more than 6 years after injury (D'Arcy et al. 2016).


Objectives and Hypothesis

We conducted a validation study to test the HCS in clinical, sub-acute acquired brain injury settings nationwide. The objectives were to (i) evaluate the feasibility of HCS testing at POC centres nationwide; (ii) compare the P300 response generated by HCS to normative data; and (iii) examine the correlations within and between clinical scales to P300 latencies. It was hypothesized that: (i) patient P300 latencies would be delayed relative to healthy control normative data; (ii) that the GCS, CRS-R and Functional Independence Measure (FIM) (Keith et al. 1987) clinical scales would be significantly inter-correlated; and (iii) patient P300 latencies would also be significantly correlated with the above clinical scales, demonstrating an important relationship with functional impairment.


Methods


Participants

EEG testing was attempted on 28 adults with severe neurological injury at diverse points-of-care across Canada. Caregivers or therapists referred patients, and preferentially included those patients suspected to have some degree of awareness. The EEG quality was sufficient to evaluate HCS results in 20 of the cases. HCS results from the remaining eight participants were not analysed due to: hearing impairment (n = 1), poor signal quality/extreme environmental and/or muscle movement artefact (n = 5) or technical failure (n = 2). All participants had sustained severe acquired brain injury (traumatic or non-traumatic including anoxia) or stroke (haemorrhagic or ischaemic) with a GCS of 8 or less in the acute phase. Participants were medically stable but chronically impaired. There was heterogeneity in terms of age, aetiology (nd), time elapsed since injury or event, level of responsiveness and rehabilitation opportunity. Twenty-five percent of these participants were fully conscious but experienced persistent and severe motor, communication and cognitive sequelae consequent to their neurological injury. The remaining 75% of the participants were classified as either being comatose, unresponsive but wakeful, partially/inconsistently responsive or fully responsive based on clinical observations and the administration of the JFK CRS-R. Although our clinical categories were informed by using the CRS-R, we purposefully avoided categorizing the patients into the firm unresponsive wakeful syndrome (UWS) or minimally conscious state (MCS) divisions described by the CRS-R, as the goal was to differentiate between broad levels of responsiveness using an objective, physiological measure not to assign patients to specific diagnostic categories.

Except for the comatose patient, all patients who were successfully tested awoke to, startled at, or oriented towards out of sight noise—a behavioural indicator of intact hearing. Three participants received full audiology evaluation to ensure their capacity to participate.


Clinical scale scores

The GCS and JFK CRS-R scores were collected as clinical measures at the time of testing. All clinical measures were correlated with one another and with P300 latencies. P300 latencies were also correlated with the FIM on a subset of participants engaged in inter-disciplinary rehabilitation. FIM scores were included in this study as this tool is frequently used in clinical settings—even for patients who are not fully responsive. In addition, this sample included a wide variety of patients with severe brain injury, including those who were unresponsive, minimally responsive and fully responsive, and the FIM captured functional differences between the groups. As the FIM reflected, many survivors of severe brain injury regain full consciousness and compensate well for their impairments despite persistent physical impairments.


Instrumentation

HCS used a portable 8-channel GmobiLab EEG system (g.tec Medical Engineering, GmbH), comprised of recording electrodes, earphones, an electrode interface, an impedance monitor and a handheld computer. Custom software automated auditory stimulus presentation (5-min sequence) and data acquisition, with a semi-automated data analysis that was manually verified. Results were derived from three midline recording electrodes, covering the anterior–posterior axis (approximating Fz, Cz, Pz). Four other electrodes served as ground (forehead), reference (earlobe) and left and right electro-oculograms (EOG) (Connolly and Kleinman 1978). All impedances were below 5 kΩ. The EEG and EOG signals were sampled at a rate of 256 Hz, with a band-pass of 0.1–100 Hz and stored for offline analyses.


Process

The National Research Council of Canada (NRC) and University of Alberta Human Research Ethics Board approved the study. Each patient or a legal delegate provided informed consent. During a single visit, the examiner(s) administered the HCS paradigm twice and administered clinical consciousness scales (GCS-R and CRS-R), often recruiting assistance from the rehabilitation staff and/or nursing staff familiar with the patient. An inter-disciplinary group of rehabilitation professionals collaboratively ranked the subset of patients actively participating in rehabilitation on the FIM as part of routine clinical care.

ERP analyses were completed and P300 components were both automatically identified and manually verified (SGH, CCL and RCND). All P300 component identification results were then additionally evaluated by separate examiners blinded to patient identities and profiles (CfP and BD). Patient preparation for HCS testing involved simple instructions to listen to tones and sentences for anything unexpected.


Stimuli

Details of the HCS stimulus sequence have been described elsewhere (D'Arcy et al. 2011). Briefly, the HCS elicited auditory ERP components linked to sensation (N100); perception (MMN); attention (P300), memory for own name (Early Negative Enhancement to Sound of Own Name); and comprehension (N400). The 5-minute auditory stimulus sequence was comprised of tones (2.5 min) followed by speech (2.5 min). Amplitude and latency data were collected on all components. For the purpose of a comparison across clinical tests, the current study focused specifically on presence or absence of N100 (sensation) and P300 latency, a well-established ERP measure of information processing. Other ERP component measures are being analysed, and the results will be detailed in future publications. In the present study, after screening for an N100 response, patient P300 latencies were compared to those of 100 healthy normative controls and then correlated with patients’ clinical scores on the GCS, CRS-R and FIM (selected cases).


Data analysis

In order to address challenges related to POC clinical testing in severe brain injury, the EEG analysis involved advanced methods to ensure proper identification of the P300 latency. Data analysis was performed using a combination of BrainVision Analyzer 2 (Brain Products GmbH, Germany) and custom software in MATLAB (MathWorks, USA). Raw continuous EEG data were band pass filtered to 0.1–20 Hz, then visually inspected to reject segments containing artefacts. Temporal independent component analysis (ICA) was performed for blink detection, followed by ocular correction using the Gratton and Coles method (Gratton et al. 1983) Subsequent pre-processing was carried out according to established methods (Luck 2014), comprised of band pass filtering (0.1–10 Hz), segmentation (−100 to 900 ms) of epochs, baseline correction (−100 to 0 ms) and conditional averaging. To further enhance the signal-to-noise ratio and optimize component detection for a heterogeneous patient sample from multiple clinical sites; segmented data were processed using wavelet filtering prior to trial averaging to obtain ERPs (Daubechies 1990). In usual ERP practice, across-trial averaging is employed to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio in order to isolate event-related brain potentials that are often several magnitudes smaller than background EEG. However, these often require a large number of trials, which is impractical within a clinical setting where signal-to-noise is suboptimal. Accordingly, we utilized a recently developed alternate SNR enhancing approach using wavelet filtering. The wavelet method is well-suited to non-stationary ERP analysis (Demiralp et al. 1999). The wavelet filtering technique builds upon previous literature (Hu et al. 2010) and uses the sample of 100 healthy control ERP data to derive thresholds for filtering patient data. Specifically, continuous wavelet transform (CWT) was first applied to the grand-average ERP waveform of the healthy control data as follows:

where is the original grand-average ERP signal in time domain, is the transformed signal in time-frequency domain, is the mother wavelet in the form of a complex Morlet function with central frequency, and and are the time and frequency indices, respectively. The parameters and were set to 0.05 and 6, respectively, in accordance with previous literature (Hu et al. 2010).

The power spectrum was computed from the transformed time-frequency signal as the square of the magnitude of the wavelet coefficients and was baseline corrected by subtracting the mean of the spectral power during the 100 ms pre-stimulus interval. The power spectrum was then normalized, and the cumulative distribution function (CDF) computed. The dynamic range of the CDF was thereafter derived, and the filtering threshold was determined as the wavelet coefficient corresponding to 85th percentile of the CDF. Subsequently CWT was computed for single trial data for each patient, and all resulting wavelet coefficients below the threshold level were set to zero. The filtered trial-level spectra were then converted back to time domain via inverse continuous wavelet transform (iCWT) as below:

where is the converted signal in time domain, is the wavelet transform after filtering, is a scalar normalization coefficient and other quantities are defined as previously illustrated. Finally, the wavelet-filtered trial-level data for each patient were averaged to derive the ERP waveform for that patient. Although CWT preserves non-phase-locked information, the application of iCWT prior to conditional trial-averaging for ERP generation ensures that the final waveforms contain only responses that are both time- and phase-locked, in line with traditional ERP practice (Luck 2014).

Both healthy control and patient data were subjected to wavelet filtering prior to ERP derivation and the same filtering thresholds were used in both healthy control and patient data. The results reported herein thus focused on relative differences between the two groups rather than raw numerical values. The current study focused on evaluation of P300 latencies only and did not compare P300 amplitudes between the healthy and patient groups because the wavelet filtering method is known to reduce ERP amplitudes but does not significantly impact component latencies (Hu et al. 2010). Statistical significance was evaluated between the control and patient groups using Welch’s t-test. In order to determine whether differences in outcomes existed between TBI and non-traumatic brain injury (n-TBI) populations, the TBI sub-group was also compared to other patients and healthy controls (corrected for multiple comparisons).

Further statistical analyses were performed to evaluate the effect of unequal subject numbers between the control and patient groups. This involved randomly selecting a sub-group of healthy control participants equal in number to that of the patient group, and repeating the Welch’s t-test. This process was repeated 10 000 times following randomized sub-group selections, and the mean probabilities were computed.

Patient ERP results were excluded if there was no clear N100 response to the tones. Two separate groups of blinded examiners (RCND, SGH, CL versus BD and CfP) reviewed the data to identify presence or absence of the N100 and P300 responses. Inter-rater reliability for the P300 was 95% (19/20) for averaged responses. However, when the individual (versus averaged) waveforms were evaluated for the patient (Participant 19), concordance was reached.


Results

shows the correlation between the GCS and CRS-R scores for all 28 patients (r = 0.937, P < 0.01). demonstrates the correlation (0.933) is significant (P < 0.01) specifically for the TBI only group (n = 12). shows a representative P300 response for a healthy control and a patient participant. In keeping with previous work (Picton 1992; Perrin et al. 2005; Linden 2005), patients in this study with severe stroke and brain injury (n = 20) showed delayed P300 latencies compared to those of the 100 healthy controls (P < 0.05) (Sculthorpe-Petley et al. 2015). Participant 8, who was partially/inconsistently responsive, did not show a P300 response so the averages were based on 19 individuals. The mean P300 latency for patients (n = 19) was 368 ms (SD = 82 ms), whereas the mean P300 latency for 100 healthy controls was 282 ms (SD = 42 ms). This result was not affected by the unequal subject numbers between the two groups, as statistical significance was maintained even when an equal number of control participants were randomly selected from the 100 overall control population and compared to patients (P < 0.05). Bootstrapping confidence interval (CI) analysis was performed by randomly selecting a subsample of 10 participants from each of the healthy and patient groups, and computing the group means from the subsample. Significance remained when this was repeated 10 000 times. The graphic corresponding to the permutation statistic is included as. is a box plot showing the mean P300 latencies (±SD) for the healthy (N = 100) and patient (N = 19) groups, with individual data points overlaid.

As shown in, the group means were 282.1 ± 41.6 ms for healthy controls, 367.2 ± 86.9 ms for TBI and 368.8 ± 81.8 ms for n-TBI including stroke. The TBI and n-TBI/stroke groups’ mean P300 latencies were not significantly different from each other. All groups were compared to each other with two tailed 2-sample unequal variance t-tests, with the TBI and n-TBI groups found to be significantly different from healthy controls (P < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected). details the P300 latency of each patient with severe brain injury (TBI or n-TBI) or stroke. Participant 8, who was partially responsive, did not demonstrate a P300 response despite an intact N100 and some behavioural signs of hearing (e.g. startle response to out of sight noise). This demonstrates an important proviso for the HCS and ERPs in general: while positive HCS results have the potential to provide informative data—a negative result such as obtained from Participant 8 (clearly partially responsive) must be treated as an unknown rather than as an indication of absence of awareness. The box plots in show the distribution of P300 latencies in each group, including healthy (N = 100), fully conscious (N = 5), partially conscious (N = 10), non-responsive (N = 3) and comatose (N = 1) with individual data points specified.

Two-tailed bivariate Pearson correlations demonstrated that the P300 latency correlated significantly with the GCS (n = 19, r = −0.56, P < 0.01), CRS-R Total Score (n = 19, r = −0.58, P < 0.01) and FIM score (n = 7, r = −0.74, P < 0.05, 1-tail). See. When only the TBI sub-group was considered, the P300 latency continued to correlate negatively with all clinical scores (P < 0.01) on 2-tailed tests except for the FIM (r = −0.88), which did not reach significance. However, given FIM scores were only available for 4 of the TBI participants, this result is likely compromised by reduced statistical power. See.


Discussion

The primary objectives of this study were to examine the feasibility of using the HCS for POC evaluation in sub-acute settings nationwide in Canada. The findings demonstrated that HCS testing at POC is feasible in sub-acute settings, with patient P300 latencies significantly delayed relative to normative health control P300 latencies (Hypothesis 1). As expected, significant correlations were established across clinical measures (Hypothesis 2). Importantly, further correlational analyses showed significant linear relationships between individual patient P300 latencies and established clinical measures (Hypothesis 3). Bootstrapping confidence intervals for P300 latencies were calculated within both healthy and patient samples, and confidence intervals did not overlap between the healthy and patient samples. This result confirmed that it is possible to obtain objective brain measures in front-line, subacute POC assessment and monitoring applications—even in patients with severe movement impairments. However, HCS utility and diagnostic accuracy in early diagnosis remain unknown at this time.

In an important study, Chennu et al. (2013) demonstrated the P300 marker of attention (exogenous and/or endogenous) in some behaviourally unresponsive patients. The authors evaluated P3a and P3b in 30 patients and 8 healthy volunteers. Nine subjects were rejected due to heavy artefact noise. In the 21 remaining patients, the authors showed evidence of exogenous and endogenous attention in a patient in an unresponsive wakeful state and exogenous attention in three patients in minimally conscious states. The unresponsive patient and two of the three minimally conscious patients subsequently demonstrated command following during tennis imagery tasks on fMRI. Whereas the focus of the aforementioned study was to determine the presence or absence of the P300 family of responses in the specified time window, this HCS study evaluated the correlation between behavioural scales and P300 latency. Like in the auditory HCS study, Chennu et al. (2013) reported a high level of inconsistency in the responses across the patient group. Kouchoubey and Pavlov (2018) completed a systematic review and meta-analysis of the relationship between brain data and outcome in DoC including 47 publications. Surprisingly, their results demonstrated that P300 and fMRI showed poor prognostic effects. This however, does not negate the importance of the measures in understanding the nature of a patient’s condition. While it is clear that P300 latency allows us to make assumptions about information processing, other ERP measures such as N400, may be more useful for prognostication. Related studies by our group (Hajra et al. 2018; Pawlowski 2018) and others (Steppacher et al. 2013) explored the potential of using N400 as a physiological indicator of masked conscious awareness with promising results.

Clinical settings have not capitalized on the potential of electrophysiology to contribute to the process of DoC evaluation, status monitoring and care planning/service designation. There is a pressing need for an easily deployed, low-cost, non-invasive and repeatable objective assessment strategy that can be used to serially monitor conscious awareness at the single patient level. Given that a patient’s state of conscious awareness hinges on many factors and can change over time; it makes sense to assess and monitor these patients once they are medically stable in the sub-acute phase. In recent years, several measures for capturing task related neural activity such as alpha band power, spectral edge frequency and mean spectral frequency have been identified (Bai et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018). Additional measures have also been reported for evaluating blink related oscillation effects, with some demonstrated efficacy in differentiating between vegetative and minimally conscious state patients (Bonfiglio et al. 2013, Liu et al. 2017). As an important first step, André-Obadia et al. (2018) have proposed recommendations for EEG and evoked potentials in comatose patients. Future work will also explore spectral markers derived from HCS data to further characterize the rich data available and this may yield complementary information. It may also be useful to explore the utility of the device in acute settings, although in acute settings many factors (consciousness-altering drugs, coexisting medical problems, etc.) can reduce the feasibility of the test and compromise the validity of the results.

The HCS uses a portable EEG system to rapidly deliver a compressed ERP sequence at POC without interrupting daily clinical routines or exhausting the patient. Given that this system does not rely on overt responses, it can be done independent of behavioural responses and therefore is not confounded by ‘motor-mind disconnection’. It is imperative that patients in minimally conscious or locked-in states receive the stimulation and rehabilitation necessary to maximize their odds of improvement (Giacino 2004; Fins et al. 2016; Illman and Crawford 2017).

The current study has a number of caveats. Given the relative rarity of disorders of conscious awareness and challenges inherent to fluctuating health status, securing an adequate sample size was challenging. This is especially the case when the objective is to evaluate a deployable HCS across a wide array of settings. Nonetheless, similar studies have employed a wide range of sample sizes ranging from 8 (Bekinschtein et al. 2009) to 173 (Sitt et al. 2014). Several studies targeting the P300 family of responses (Cavinato et al. 2011; Chennu et al. 2013; Ragazzoni et al. 2013) have used sample sizes similar to the present study.

Another caveat relates to selection bias. In this study, patients were referred by caregivers or therapists who likely preferentially referred patients suspected to have some degree of awareness. Given this bias, separate validation studies would be required for patients with absolutely no clinical or behavioural indicators of consciousness. Further work is required to model effects across different centres to better understand key influencing factors (e.g. hardware, environment, data collection protocols, etc.).

Due to the nature of conscious awareness, studies of DoC also face inherent challenges of sensitivity and specificity. Diagnosis occurs at the individual patient level so although showing group differences is necessary for a tool to be diagnostically useful, it is not sufficient. However, because a ‘gold standard’ for the assessment of consciousness independent of behaviour does not exist, it is very difficult to validate a new tool. Further, as is the case with other technologies that have been trialled for diagnosing conscious awareness such as fMRI, the HCS is sensitive to specific markers like the P300, but lacks specificity in the event of negative results. Therefore, negative test results must be considered inconclusive. Even though ERPs can eliminate reliance on overt responses, participation requires basic attention, sensory, perceptual, and often, receptive language capacity. A breakdown can occur at the input stage, even if internal awareness exists. In order to mitigate this confound, a larger, multi-sensory diagnostic battery is necessary.


Waving goodbye to contrast: self-generated hand movements attenuate visual sensitivity

Madis Vasser, Laurène Vuillaume, Axel Cleeremans, Jaan Aru — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6342231, CC BY 4.0.

It is well known that the human brain continuously predicts the sensory consequences of its own body movements, which typically results in sensory attenuation. Yet, the extent and exact mechanisms underlying sensory attenuation are still debated. To explore this issue, we asked participants to decide which of two visual stimuli was of higher contrast in a virtual reality situation where one of the stimuli could appear behind the participants’ invisible moving hand or not. Over two experiments, we measured the effects of such “virtual occlusion” on first-order sensitivity and on metacognitive monitoring. Our findings show that self-generated hand movements reduced the apparent contrast of the stimulus. This result can be explained by the active inference theory. Moreover, sensory attenuation seemed to affect only first-order sensitivity and not (second-order) metacognitive judgments of confidence.


Introduction

Imagine having a drink in a pub. Your eyes fixate on the glass and your arm stretches to grab it. You are not bothered at all by the appearance of this long elongated shape (your arm) in your visual field. But now consider the same situation where a similar long elongated shape moves towards your beverage—be it a snake, or the arm of a colleague. In this case, you would immediately notice this potentially threatening moving object. Hence, it seems that the movement of our own body parts is processed differently from that of objects of the external world, many of which may nevertheless exhibit similar properties. In particular, it seems that the movement of our own body parts is not so salient, i.e. it captures less attention than the movement of external objects. In the present work, we ask in which sense the movements of our own body are processed differently than that of external objects.

The brain’s ability to predict and attenuate the various sensory consequences of the movements of its own body is well known. However, the exact mechanisms underlying sensory attenuation are still debated (Blakemore et al. 1998; Bays et al. 2006; Brown et al. 2013; Clark 2015). The active inference, or prediction error minimization theory (Friston 2010; Hohwy 2013; Clark 2015) posits that the brain is constantly predicting sensory input. Predictions are then continuously compared with sensory input in such a way that only prediction errors are propagated further, with the overall computational goal of minimizing prediction error in the long term. Accordingly, performing actions is an efficient way of minimizing prediction errors by changing the sensory data so as to fit the predictions (Friston 2010; Hohwy 2013; Clark 2015). The active inference theory suggests that movements are elicited by predicting the sensory consequences of the movement (e.g. that the hand will be moving in the visual field). These predictions will drive the behavior so that the organism will perform the necessary movements leading to the predicted state. However, the predicted consequences (e.g. the hand will be moving towards the glass) are not in agreement with the current sensory data (where the hand is still in a resting position). The active inference theory proposes that this mismatch between the predictions and sensory data is resolved through withdrawal of attention from the current sensory input, resulting in sensory attenuation (for a longer treatment of this proposal see Brown et al. 2013; Clark 2015). Hence, according to active inference sensory attenuation is a necessary counterpart of movement. This proposed mechanism of sensory attenuation can explain several findings in the literature that are difficult to understand under the classic efference copy view (e.g. Bays et al. 2006; Voss et al. 2008; van Doorn et al. 2014, Laak et al. 2017).

Recent work with virtual reality (VR) devices has brought direct support for active inference by demonstrating that attention is withdrawn from the area of the visual field where one’s own hand is currently moving (Laak et al. 2017). Participants were slower to detect stimulus changes (both movement and color) in the condition where the change occurred behind their precisely tracked hand in VR. Importantly, participants themselves did not see their virtual hand, as it was rendered invisible. Thus, the effect was caused by prediction rather than by visual occlusion. Motor predictions also attenuate brain activity caused by corresponding visual feedback (Limanowski et al. 2018).

In the work by Laak et al. (2017), which was designed to investigate active inference, the effect of lowered attention was observed through longer reaction times—an indirect measure of the quality of perception. In the current article, we sought to extend these previous results to probe the effect of self-generated movement prediction on perception more directly. We based our study on the experimental approach used by Carrasco et al. (2004). In their paradigm, two Gabor patches with different orientations are presented, one cued and the other not, and the participants are asked to report the orientation of the Gabor patch with the stronger contrast. Through this experimental approach, the authors could demonstrate that covert attention enhances the perceived contrast of an attended stimulus (Carrasco et al. 2004). We reasoned that if (i) attention is withdrawn from the part of the visual field where one’s hand is moving (Laak et al. 2017) and (ii) the deployment of attention affects perceived contrast (Carrasco et al. 2004), then the subjective contrast of objects in the region of the visual field where the hand is moving should be reduced.

In addition to first-order sensitivity, we also sought to investigate the effect of self-generated movements on higher-order processes such as metacognition, that is, the ability to monitor and control one’s own mental states (Koriat 2007). To come back to the pub setting, in addition to grabbing your beer, it is quite important to be sure that it really is yours, and that you are not actually stealing your neighbor’s beer, for instance. Metacognition is a crucial part of our daily life and a critical aspect of decision making in different domains (Metcalfe and Shimamura 1996; Fleming et al. 2012). In recent years, metacognition has become a prominent topic of investigation. However, to our knowledge, no previous study has directly addressed the influence of sensory attenuation on metacognition, and studies focusing on the interplay between attention and metacognition have so far yielded mixed results (Wilimzig et al. 2008; Kanai et al. 2010; Rahnev et al. 2011; Sherman et al. 2015). Here, we measured the quality of metacognitive monitoring by asking participants to rate their confidence in their response on each trial, and by assessing the relationship between objective performance and subjective confidence (Galvin et al. 2003). This allowed us to explore our second research question: do the self-generated movements also alter metacognitive accuracy?

To address these questions, we conducted two VR experiments where participants performed a visual two-alternative forced choice task coupled with moving their hand to overlap one of the target stimuli. Crucially, while the hand was tracked via sensors, the hand avatar was not shown to the participants. This made it possible to assess the extent to which visual expectations coupled to self-generated movement result in sensory attenuation.

In Experiment 1, we probed the first-order effects of hand movements on contrast judgements. Experiment 2 aimed to replicate Experiment 1 with a new group of participants, and to additionally probe the extent to which self-generated movements also influence metacognitive accuracy. In Experiment 2, participants thus also reported the confidence in their decisions, on every trial. A control condition in which the visual targets never appeared at locations situated behind the moving hand was also carried out. This allowed us to clarify whether the attenuation effect also extends to metacognitive ability or not.


Materials and Methods


Experimental setup

Our experimental setup was very similar to that of Laak et al. (2017). The hardware solution consisted of an Oculus Rift CV1 VR headset combined with a Leap Motion hand tracking device mounted directly on the goggles. This allowed us to have absolute control over the visual environment the participant perceived in the lab and also made it possible to record the relative transforms and parameters of the participant’s hands (position, velocity, and orientation). Crucially, however, the hand avatar was not rendered in the virtual world. Thus, wherever we mention the “target behind the hand,” the hand in question was completely invisible to the participant wearing the headset. As in Carrasco et al. (2004), the visual stimuli consisted of Gabor patches with different contrasts, frequencies, and orientations, shown in horizontally placed pairs (A). For the control condition of Experiment 2, the pairs were positioned vertically to avoid the effects of hand movement on contrast judgements.

Importantly, the participants’ task was orthogonal to the location of the stimuli (and thus to their hand movement) as their task was to report the orientation of the patch that seemed higher in contrast (see Carrasco et al. 2004) rather than to report its location (Experiment 1). In Experiment 2, participants were additionally requested to report how confident they were in their decision. Stimulus presentation was triggered by the participants’ pre-trained hand movement. The stimuli were shown behind the hand only when the hand was moving upwards and the center of the palm hit a virtual predefined target rectangle measuring 6° in width and 3° in height. Responses were registered by a left or right mouse click to indicate the orientation of the more contrasted Gabor and with the mouse scroll wheel to select a confidence rating from 1 to 4 followed by a mouse click to confirm the selected rating. We switched the hands used for movement and responses in the middle of the experiment so as to balance for possible preferences for one hand over the other. The stimulus marked as behind the hand was always on the side of the hand movement. A correctly executed hand movement only covered one of the Gabors. Participants were instructed to keep their gaze on the fixation point (a black dot in the middle of the field of view). As in Carrasco et al. (2004), one of the two Gabor patches was always displayed with a set contrast (Standard), while the other was either of lower, identical, or higher in contrast (Target). In both experiments, we compared the percentage of trials reported to be higher in contrast in cases where the target appeared behind the invisible hand vs. cases where the target was not behind the hand. The temporal and spatial distribution of the targets in different conditions were kept constant in both experiments in relation to the participants’ hand movements.


Apparatus

Participants were seated behind a table, with a standard computer mouse under one hand and an empty mouse pad under the other so as to promote consistent hand movements (B). Participants were fitted with an Oculus Rift CV1 (Oculus VR, LLC; Oculus) VR headset with a refresh rate of 90 Hz, and a field of view of approximately 100° and precise, low-latency positional tracking. The Leap Motion Controller (Leap Motion, Inc.; Leap) Orion SDK (version 3.1.2) mounted on the headset was used to track hand movements. The Leap Motion sensor tracks the position, velocity, and orientation of hands and fingers with low latency and an average position accuracy of 1.2 mm (Weichert et al. 2013), with a field of view of 150° horizontally and 120° vertically. The experiments were conducted in a quiet and dark room.


Stimuli

The default virtual environment consisted of a uniform gray background with a small black fixation dot (0.7° in diameter) in the middle of the field of view, directly in front of the participant. The Gabor patches that appeared during hand movements were approximately 4° in diameter from the perspective of the subject. Patches were generated only when the hand moved over a predefined rectangular target area in the virtual environment. The distance of the patches from the central fixation point ranged between 3° and 9° to allow for some hand movement error in the horizontal axis. As in Carrasco et al. (2004), we varied the cycles per degree (CPD) of the gratings to avoid adaption to the stimuli and used 2 CPD and 4 CPD stimuli. The different contrasts and presentation times were chosen according to an extensive pilot study. The final contrasts corresponded to the following Michelson contrast values: 0.2, 0.24, 0.3, 0.36, 0.45. (Michelson contrast = (Lmax − Lmin)/(Lmax + Lmin), where Lmin is the lowest luminance of the stimulus and Lmax the maximum luminance of the stimulus.) The standard value used in all the trials was 0.3. Pairs of patches were shown for 133 ms on each trial, after which participants reported the orientation of the patch that seemed to have more contrast. In Experiment 2, participants were additionally asked to report their confidence in their answer on a scale from 1 (very unsure) to 4 (very sure). Participants did not receive any feedback about their responses during the experiment.


Participants

Participants were recruited through university lists and social media. A total of 54 healthy participants with normal or corrected-to-normal vision took part in the two experiments: 8 in the first (2 females, mean age 25), and 46 in the second experiment (27 females, mean age 23). In the second experiment, 30 participants were assigned to the experimental group and 16 participants to the control group. All of the participants read and signed informed consent forms and participated in the experiments voluntarily. The VR experiments conducted in this study were approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Tartu (Estonia) and the Ethics Committee of the Psychology Department of the Université Libre de Bruxelles (Belgium).


Procedure


Instructions to the participants

The experiment was introduced to the participants as a study on attention. The hand-tracking device was described as “a device that simply detects the general direction of hand movements that is needed to start each trial” in order to cover the true aim of the experiment. After signing an informed consent form, participants completed training on the required hand movement and on discriminating the Gabors. The exact protocol for hand movement training is explained elsewhere (Laak et al. 2017). Participants were informed that the Gabor patches would be triggered by the upwards movements of the hand.


Experiment 1

Each participant performed a total of 800 trials, of which 40% showed the Gabor with the stronger contrast behind the hand, 40% showed it at a location not behind the hand, and 20% had equal contrast (standard vs. standard). The conditions were balanced and randomized for each participant, and each participant was exposed to all of the conditions. After every 100 trials, a short rest of 10 s occurred. The general design of a single trial for all of the experiments is shown in C.

When participants missed the target area for the correct hand movement on several consecutive trials, they were verbally guided by the experimenter to improve their hand movement. After the experiment, participants answered control questions about complying with the instructions and were debriefed about the background and purposes of the study.


Experiment 2

In order to investigate the effects of sensory attenuation on metacognition, participants were randomly assigned to either an experimental group or a control group. Each participant performed a total of 400 trials in the experimental group and 300 trials in the control group. The experimental group was similar to Experiment 1. In the control group however, the pair of Gabor patches was shown vertically around the fixation dot instead of horizontally so as to make it so that neither stimulus appeared in the visual area where the hand was moving. In both groups participants were additionally asked to give their confidence in their decision on a scale from 1 (very unsure) to 4 (very sure).


Data preprocessing

Data preprocessing and analysis were performed in R (version 3.1.2; R Core Team 2015) using the afex package (Singmann et al. 2015), BayesFactor package using the medium default prior (Morey et al. 2015) and ggplot2 package (Wickham 2009). We discarded trials where the hand movement was not within the allowed constraints. Taken together, 56% of trials were rejected from Experiment 1, and 34% of trials from Experiment 2. This was due to the extreme precision necessary to ensure that hand movements were exactly in the same region of the visual field as the intended stimulus. Next, we completely excluded participants that failed to show an increase in percentage of higher contrast judgements between the two lower test contrast values and the two higher test contrast values (hinting that the participant may have answered randomly). After this we were left with the following number of participants: 6 (Experiment 1) and 44 (Experiment 2).


Statistical analysis

For statistical testing we used within-subject repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test for the mean difference in the percentage of trials reported to be of higher contrast in different conditions. Degrees of freedom were corrected using the Greenhouse–Geisser method. Welch’s t-tests were used to test for the statistical difference between accuracy, confidence, and metacognitive ability in the experimental group compared to the control group in Experiment 2 (the equal contrast trials were not included in this analysis since accuracy in this case cannot be computed). Metacognitive ability was estimated through the type II area under the receiver-operating curve (AROC), which determines the rate of correct and incorrect responses at each confidence level (Kornbrot 2006). A second approach for evaluating metacognitive ability was fitting a mixed logistic regression model of accuracy with group, confidence and their interaction as fixed effects, and a random participant intercept. The regression slope was taken as an indicator of metacognitive ability (see Siedlecka et al. 2016). We also used Bayesian statistics to assess the likelihood that data were in favor of the alternative or null hypothesis using the default medium prior of the BayesFactor R package (Morey et al. 2015). This is especially relevant to interpret non-significant P-values in conventional statistics (Dienes 2014). Bayes Factors (BFs) above 1 indicate evidence for the alternative hypothesis whereas BF below 1 indicates evidence for the null hypothesis.


Results


Experiment 1

Using a motion tracking device in combination with VR technology, we were able to investigate whether self-generated movements influence visual perception despite participants never seeing their hand. Participants performed a two-alternative forced choice task where they had to report the orientation of the Gabor patch with the higher contrast. Crucially for the experiments, one of the Gabor patches was located in the same visual area as the self-generated hand movement.

The main results are illustrated in, which suggest that for all contrast differences, target items that appear behind the hand are less often reported to be of higher contrast than targets that appear at the other location, which is indicative of sensory attenuation. A within-subjects ANOVA showed a main effect of contrast [F(1.37, 6.85) = 48.12, P < 0.001, = 0.80] and importantly, also a strong effect of whether the stimulus appeared behind the invisible hand or not [F(1, 5) = 15.07, P = 0.01, = 0.58]. We found no interaction between condition and contrast [F(1.79, 8.97) = 3.1, P = 0.10, = 0.07]. This suggests that apparent contrast is indeed reduced when shown in the area of the visual field where the hand is currently moving.


Experiment 2

The first goal of Experiment 2 was to replicate Experiment 1 in another laboratory. Additionally, Experiment 2 was also aimed at exploring the extent to which sensory attenuation influences metacognitive processes. The design of Experiment 2 was thus identical to that of Experiment 1, except that participants were also requested to report the confidence in their judgement on every trial, using a scale ranging from 1 (very unsure) to 4 (very sure). Experiment 2 included a control condition in which targets never appeared behind the moving hand.


Experimental group


Replication of Experiment 1

We first sought to replicate our findings from Experiment 1. The same analysis confirmed these results, by revealing a main effect of contrast [F(1.57, 45.39) = 212.10, P < 10−4, = 0.66] and a significant difference in the percentage of “higher contrast” responses between the “behind the hand” condition and the “not behind the hand” condition [F(1, 29) = 11.13, P = 0.002, = 0.18]. There was again no interaction between Condition and Contrast [F(3.60, 104.27) = 1.01, P = 0.40, = 0.005]. Similarly to Experiment 1, this indicates that apparent contrast is reduced when shown in the same visual area as the self-generated movement.


Confidence

An analysis of variance revealed, as expected, a main effect of contrast on confidence [F(3.24, 93.99) = 55.49, P < 10−4, = 0.17], as well as a significant difference in confidence ratings between the “behind the hand” condition and the “not behind the hand” condition [F(1, 29) = 6.17, P = 0.02, = 0.004]. The interaction between Contrast and Condition was also significant [F(2.05, 59.42) = 10.12, P = 0.0001, = 0.05]. This suggests that participants were able to adjust their confidence according to the perceived contrasts.

In order to evaluate the effect of self-generated movements on metacognitive ability we added a control group. Indeed, in the experimental group one of the stimuli was always behind the hand movement (the test contrast or the standard contrast), and thus there was always one of the two contrasts that appeared to be reduced. To investigate the effect of sensory attenuation on metacognitive ability, it was necessary to compare the experimental group to a control group in which both of the stimuli were shown in a different visual area than the self-generated hand movement. To do so, in the control group the stimuli were presented vertically around the fixation point instead of horizontally. This made it possible to use exactly the same procedure as used in the experimental group but with none of the stimuli presented in the visual area behind which the hand was moving.


Control group

We first controlled that participants in the control group performed the task correctly. Analysis of variance also revealed a main effect of contrast on the percentage of stimuli reported to be higher in contrast [F(1.45, 18.87) = 133.71, P < 10−4, = 0.90] and on confidence ratings [F(3.01, 39.17) = 19.24, P < 10−4, = 0.27].


Comparison between the experimental group and the control group

We found no effect of group on type 1 sensitivity [d′: t(26.95) = −0.36, P = 0.72) or criterion [t(34.56) = 0.93, P = 0.36] and no effect of group on confidence ratings either [t(30.57) = 0.21, P = 0.84].


Metacognition

Metacognitive accuracy as measured with the AROC did not differ between groups [t(21.54) = −0.49, P = 0.63, BF = 0.35] nor did Type II bias [BROC: t(35.40) = 0.68, P = 0.50, BF = 0.36]. The mixed logistic regressions between accuracy and confidence, with the regression slope taken as an indicator of metacognitive ability (see Siedlecka et al. 2016), yielded similar results (no difference between the control group and the experimental group slopes: estimate = −0.02, z = −0.38, P = 0.70).


Discussion

In two independent experiments, we observed that (invisible) self-generated movements influence visual sensitivity while leaving metacognitive accuracy intact. This suggests that perception is directly influenced by one’s expectations about the sensory consequences of one’s own movements. In our paradigm, visual targets that would normally be occluded by our own moving limbs were perceptually attenuated although these targets were fully visible.

This was achieved by combining VR goggles and a hand tracking device, allowing us to present stimuli in the same visual area as the hand and at the same time being able to keep the hand invisible to the participants (Laak et al. 2017). This novel paradigm allowed us to investigate sensory attenuation in the visual domain, which until recently was often overlooked due to the technical limitations associated with the challenge of removing visual sensory feedback.

After initiating the hand movement, participants had to indicate the orientation of the Gabor patch with higher contrast. We observed that the contrast of the stimulus behind the invisible hand was significantly reduced. We replicated these results in an independent group of participants and estimated whether metacognitive ability would also be affected by our experimental manipulation. In order to measure metacognitive accuracy, participants were additionally required to report their confidence in their response on each trial. There was no difference in metacognitive accuracy between the experimental group and the control group, suggesting that participants in the experimental group were able to adjust their subjective confidence to their objective performance. Indeed, even though the contrast of one of the stimuli was reduced through sensory attenuation, they could equally well judge their confidence in their decision. That is, if a low test contrast was attenuated they were more confident in their decision—they could tell that it was easier—and, similarly, if a high test contrast was attenuated they were less confident in their decision. This is in line with previous work from Kanai et al. (2010) who showed that metacognitive ability was preserved when attention was diverted using several methods as well as the study from Sherman et al. (2015) who found no difference in metacognitive ability between a full attention and a diverted attention condition in a perceptual task. Furthermore, being able to tell that there is sensory attenuation might be a crucial cue in recognizing an action as being internally triggered and not externally triggered. This has been emphasized in the study of schizophrenia patients who showed deficit in attenuating the sensory consequences of their actions which in turn gave rise to issues in discriminating self-generated actions from externally triggered events (Blakemore et al. 2003; Shergill et al. 2005; Fletcher and Frith 2009). Sensory attenuation thus appears to only influence first-order processes.

The main results confirm those of Laak et al. (2017) but go a step further by indicating that self-generated movements do not only impact reaction times through attenuating attention, they also influence visual sensitivity per se. Our results thus offer support for the active inference account, which posits sensory attenuation of visual processing due to sensory precision being reduced during movement (Friston 2010; Hohwy 2013; Clark 2015).


Alternative explanations to the present findings

Active inference can readily explain our present results: in order to move, precision of the sensory data that would be in conflict with the predicted outcome has to be reduced and this is done by withdrawing attention from the parts of the visual field where the hand is currently moving. The consequence of withdrawn attention is that the Gabor that would be on the path of the moving hand (if the hand would be visible) is seen with less contrast. According to the active inference theory, sensory attenuation is the consequence of withdrawing attention from the sensory data coming from the specific parts of the visual field where the hand is moving.

However, in principle one could also explain the present findings with a more general account of attentional suppression in space. In particular, one could claim that when a limb is moving, visual spatial attention is more generally withdrawn, i.e. not only from the trajectory where the hand is moving. From our present results we know that it cannot be a suppression of the whole visual field (otherwise we could not obtain differences between the two conditions), but for example it could be claimed that in the hemifield where the hand is currently moving attention is withdrawn. We think that there are several reasons to doubt such a general suppression. First, although we did not test for the spatial specificity in this study, in the previous work with the similar setup (Laak et al. 2017; experiment 2) we observed that attention seems not to be withdrawn from locations that are in the same visual hemifield as the hand movement but not directly on the movement path. Second, such a general suppression would be disadvantageous: For example, if one is reaching for an object this general attentional suppression would lead to the withdrawal of attention from the reach target. This would be unreasonable and in fact experimental data have demonstrated that attention is enhanced around reach targets (Rolfs et al. 2013). The last finding might prompt the question whether it is in conflict with the present results: how can reach targets be attentionally prioritized while the hand movement trajectory is attenuated? Active inference theory can explain this as enhancing the precision of the target is a separate process which can occur independently of and together with the reduction of precision from those parts of the visual field where the hand is moving.

The more classic efference copy theory gives a more specific alternative explanation to the present results than the general suppression account. Efference copy theory suggests that sensory input that is predicted by the own motor command is canceled. Such forward models are learned over the lifetime and can be used to explain sensory attenuation (e.g. Blakemore et al. 1998). However, this theory has also trouble explaining the present results. In particular, subjects cannot have been learning over the lifetime that the hand movement predicts the appearance of a Gabor. In principle, one could suggest that the association between hand movement and appearance of Gabors could have been learned over the course of the experiment, but this cannot explain the difference between the two conditions (as all hand movements were followed by the presentation of both Gabors). More generally, the efference copy theory cannot account for several findings on the field that are readily explained by active inference theory (for overview see Brown et al. 2013; Clark 2015). Hence, overall, active inference casts the most comprehensive explanation of sensory attenuation both for the current findings and for the variety of results available in the literature.


Limitations and further questions

Due to the limits of the used hardware, it was impossible to record participant’s eye movements during the experiments. Therefore, no technical guarantee can be given that the participants maintained stable gaze on the fixation point throughout the experiment. To mitigate this, we had targets with varying contrast on both sides of the visual field, so participants had no incentive to prefer one side over the other. The participants were also instructed to keep their eyes on the fixation point during the trials and all verbally complied. Future research methodology could benefit from the next generation VR headsets and add-on devices rapidly becoming available at a reasonable price that allow eye-tracking (e.g. FOVE Inc. 2018; Tobii 2018).

Prospective investigations are also required to examine more precisely how our findings generalize over different categories of stimuli or stimulus feature differentiation. It has been shown that these aspects can interact with attention and metacognition (Stein and Peelen 2017; Matthews et al. 2018). In addition, the precise influence of evidence-reliability remains to be elucidated in more extensive work as it has also been shown to affect confidence judgments and metacognition (Boldt et al. 2017; Bang and Fleming 2018; Denison et al. 2018).

Using this paradigm, one could further investigate the characteristics of visual attenuation caused by self-generated hand movements. Indeed, it would be interesting to compare our results with a static version, in which participants just hold their hand at the target position all the time. According to the active inference theory, we would expect that without any movement the attenuation would disappear. One could also investigate the role of agency and intention to act by removing the self-generated component and having the experimenter move the hand of the participant (Limanowski et al. 2018). One could also test whether subjects who are less prone to sensory attenuation also exhibit diminished agency judgements. Furthermore, we would expect attenuation to build up with stronger expectations of hand movement over time (see Bays et al. 2006; Voss et al. 2008). The role of proprioception could be tested as well using a vibrator on the arm tendon in order to induce proprioceptive noise and disrupt these signals. Similarly, inducing a rubber hand illusion (Botvinick and Cohen 1998) has also been shown to lead to cases of sensory attenuation (Burin et al. 2017). Using this paradigm in that context could make it possible to better understand the role of body ownership and to assess the extent to which the illusion could misplace the effect of the self-generated movement on another visual area. Finally, the perceptual consequences of own hand movements have been established over decades of learning and cannot be “unlearned” with only a few hundred trials. It would be interesting to test how sensory attenuation develops for example for a newly learned tool.


Conclusions

We conducted two experiments showing that self-generated hand movements reduce the subjective contrast of objects in the part of the visual field where the hand is directly moving, but do not alter metacognitive monitoring. The present experimental paradigm provides a novel way to study sensory attenuation and demonstrates the usefulness of modern VR tools for investigating fundamental questions about the computations that run our lives.


Building perception block by block: a response to Fekete et al.

Adrien Doerig, Frank Scharnowski, Michael H Herzog — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6349944, CC BY 4.0.

Is consciousness a continuous stream, or do percepts occur only at certain moments of time? This age-old question is still under debate. Both positions face difficult problems, which we proposed to overcome with a 2-stage model, where unconscious processing continuously integrates information before a discrete, conscious percept occurs. Recently, Fekete et al. criticized our model. Here, we show that, contrary to their proposal, simple sliding windows cannot explain apparent motion and related phenomena within a continuous framework, and that their supervenience argument only holds true for qualia realists, a philosophical position we do not adopt.

Keywords: consciousness, discrete perception

Intuitively, consciousness is a continuous stream of percepts. We see a diver jumping from a cliff into the ocean and have the feeling we perceive their motion trajectory at each single moment of time. However, continuous perception theories face serious problems known since ancient times. For example, a disk is presented at two locations separated by a blank period. We do not perceive two small disks presented at two locations, but a single disk moving between the locations even though there is no motion at all in the stimulus (apparent motion). Obviously, we can only perceive the motion after the second disk is presented and, hence, perception cannot be immediate. Other examples demonstrating that the percept cannot occur immediately include feature fusion, the flash-lag illusion, the continuous wagon-wheel illusion, etc.

To accommodate these findings, discrete theories propose that percepts occur only at certain moments of time. For example, snapshot theories propose that we sample information from the environment like a surveillance camera, taking pictures periodically. However, these positions also face severe problems (see Herzog et al. 2016). In particular, no experiment has ever shown evidence for a unique and paradigm-independent sampling rate. In addition, any information between snapshots would be lost.

To overcome these problems, we proposed a 2-stage theory (Herzog et al. 2016) where continuous, unconscious processing with high temporal resolution integrates information for several hundred milliseconds (Stage 1), which is then rendered conscious as a coherent percept at a discrete moment in time (Stage 2). Importantly, temporal features, such as motion, are not consciously perceived while they occur. They are not even perceived over an extended period of time, but are encoded as any other feature, such as colour or shape, by a static label. For example, motion is not represented by a signal that moves in time but by the output of a motion detector.

Fekete et al. (2018) criticized our model based on two main arguments.

Sliding windows: They argue that phenomena such as apparent motion can be explained within a continuous framework by sliding windows. We will explain why this argument fails.

Perceptual change and neural change: They claim that perceptual change must be mirrored by neural change: ‘admitting that there is perceptual change (e.g. in the location of the object) not mirrored in neuronal change […] would amount to violation of supervenience—the notion that consciousness is determined by physical processes […]’. We will show that either there is a misunderstanding about supervenience in their argument or they subscribe to a realist position about qualia.


Sliding windows

There is agreement that ‘instantaneous’ continuous theories, in which sensory evidence is immediately translated into a conscious percept cannot be true because phenomena such as apparent motion require integration over extended periods of time. Fekete et al. proposed that continuous theories can explain such phenomena by sliding windows. For example, a window, starting integration with the presentation of the first disk and terminating with the second one, might explain apparent motion. Conscious perception just occurs after the presentation of the second disk—it is delayed but continuous. However, the example fails for a very simple reason. Integration does not start with the presentation of the first disk and terminates with the second one. It is continuous! Let us consider—step by step—what would happen in the sliding window account. First, the window comprises only an empty screen and, hence, only an empty screen would be perceived. When we move the window further, it comprises empty screen moments and the first disk. At this stage, we would perceive the first disk—and only it. When we move the window further, both disks are now present, and we would perceive motion. Finally, we would perceive only the second disk when the first disk is outside the sliding window. However, this is not what we actually perceive. We see only one moving disk and never single static disks. Hence, the idea of a rigid sliding window is not tenable.

As mentioned, a sliding window can explain why we perceive motion when the window contains both disks. For example, a classical motion detector fires only when it is stimulated by two distinct consecutive events (for certain spatial positions and delays, thus, creating a direction and speed sensitive neuron; Adelson and Bergen 1991; Jancke et al. 2004; Lu and Sperling 1995; Watson and Ahumada 1985). Such a motion detector is equivalent to an integration window and explains why we perceive two discrete events as continuous, as is the case in apparent motion. Hence, it explains why we perceive continuity instead of discrete events. However, it does not explain the discreteness of perception. Namely, it cannot explain why we only perceive a single moving disk and not two additional static disks in windows preceding and following the window containing both disks—even though the visual system clearly can detect both the first and second disk when they are presented alone (e.g. using a ‘static disk’ detector). The very same argument applies to feature fusion and other phenomena where two discrete events are perceived as a single continuous event.


Perceptual change and neural change

We completely agree with Fekete et al. that different percepts must come with different brain states. It cannot be that the very same brain state gives rise to different percepts. This is a pre-requisite for studying consciousness neuroscientifically. However, this does not imply that temporal changes in perception, such as motion, are mirrored by temporal changes in the brain. Motion in the external world does not need to be represented by brain dynamics—it can simply be coded statically by the output of a motion detector. Different kinds of motion (speed, direction, etc.) are encoded by different motion detectors. Likewise, a 40 ms stimulus may not be perceived over a duration of 40 ms but instead might be encoded by the output of a duration detector, i.e. a ‘static’ number indicating a 40 ms duration. And a duration of 50 ms might be encoded by another detector. According to our theory, different percepts correspond to different brain states. Thus, there is no supervenience problem. It seems that Fekete et al. postulate that each physical moment of motion needs to be represented by a different brain state, potentially because they subscribe to a realist position about qualia (see Qualia and philosophical assumptions section of this contribution). Accordingly, when we perceive a ball moving continuously from A to B, there must be a different brain state for each intermediate position of the ball. In our approach, this is not the case—a single brain state encodes the entire motion percept.


Related arguments

Subsequent arguments against our model rest on this misunderstanding of the supervenience argument, or on strong qualia realism. For example, Fekete et al. argue that, if perception were discrete, updates would need to occur roughly every 33 ms (i.e. at 30 Hz, but the precise value is not crucial) because neural change needs to match perceptual change. They further argue that this is impossible because of the slow neural dynamics of the primary visual cortex. However, this argument does not apply to our theory for the reasons described above.


Qualia and philosophical assumptions

The question about the time course of perception directly relates to the question of qualia. As mentioned, motion detection does not need to be coded by a dynamically changing representation. What about motion experiences? In our model, the experience of motion does not extend in time, it only seems to. In this respect, we are close to the illusionist position (Dennett 2016; Frankish 2016), which proposes that qualia do not exist as real distinct entities—they only seem to. Similarly, the meta-problem research program (Chalmers 2018) aims to explain why we think there is a hard problem of consciousness, i.e. why it seems that qualia exist as real distinct entities.

Our approach is at odds with a realist interpretation of qualia, which Fekete et al. seem to adopt. Given such incompatible philosophical underpinnings, our proposals are naturally very different. Thus, our dispute gets to the heart of the heated debate on how to link neural processes to conscious percepts. Because the sliding window argument fails to account for phenomena in which two discrete events are perceived as a single continuous event (and for other independent reasons, e.g. Sergent 2018), we suggest that discrete models should be favoured. Whatever the final answer is, we believe that questions about the time course of conscious perception, a highly under-investigated research area, are a fundamental stepping-stone to understand perception and consciousness, and we thank Fekete et al. for their stimulating contribution to this crucial debate.


Revealing subthreshold motor contributions to perceptual confidence

Thibault Gajdos, Stephen M Fleming, Marta Saez Garcia, Gabriel Weindel, Karen Davranche — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6379662, CC BY 4.0.

Established models of perceptual metacognition, the ability to evaluate our perceptual judgements, posit that perceptual confidence depends on the strength or quality of feedforward sensory evidence. However, alternative theoretical accounts suggest the entire perception-action cycle, and not only variation in sensory evidence, is monitored when evaluating confidence in one’s percepts. Such models lead to the counterintuitive prediction that perceptual confidence should be directly modulated by features of motor output. To evaluate this proposal here we recorded electromyographic (EMG) activity of motor effectors while subjects performed a near-threshold perceptual discrimination task and reported their confidence in each response in a pre-registered experiment. A subset of trials exhibited subthreshold EMG activity in response effectors before a decision was made. Strikingly, trial-by-trial analysis showed that confidence, but not accuracy, was significantly higher on trials with subthreshold motor activation. These findings support a hypothesis that preparatory motor activity, or a related latent variable, impacts upon confidence over and above performance, consistent with models in which perceptual metacognition integrates information across the perception-action cycle.


Introduction

Our perception of the outside world is associated with variable degrees of confidence. For instance, when driving in fog, we are less confident about the presence of oncoming cars and may slow down accordingly. Prominent computational models, grounded in signal detection theory and evidence accumulation frameworks, suggest that perceptual confidence is determined by the strength of an internal decision variable that encodes evidence in support of different interpretations of a stimulus (Vickers 1979; Galvin et al. 2003; Kiani and Shadlen 2009). Intuitively, the stronger the perceptual evidence, the more confident we should be in our decision. Such models in turn predict that perceptual discrimination accuracy and confidence should be tightly coupled, and be affected by similar experimental manipulations.

However, recent theoretical models of metacognition suggest that the entire perception-action cycle, and not only variation in sensory evidence, may be monitored when evaluating confidence in one’s decisions (Pouget et al. 2016; Fleming and Daw 2017). Such models lead to the counterintuitive prediction that confidence in perceptual judgements should be specifically modulated by features of motor output as well as perceptual input. Indeed, recent observations suggest that confidence in perceptual tasks does not only result from feedforward sensory input, but also depends on other sources of information (Siedlecka et al. 2016, 2018a,b). For instance longer response times (Kiani et al. 2014) or unexpected arousal (Allen et al. 2016) have been found to modulate confidence without affecting accuracy. Confidence in perceptual tasks is also disrupted by manipulation of movement speed (Palser et al. 2018) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of the motor system (Fleming et al. 2015). However, a link between trial-by-trial motor output and perceptual confidence remains to be established.

Here, we set out to study this relationship by recording subthreshold fluctuations in electromyographic (EMG) activity as sensitive markers of motor preparatory activity during perceptual discrimination. Specifically, partial muscular activations (henceforth, partial activations) corresponding to subthreshold motor responses have repeatedly been observed in between-hand choice reaction time tasks (Eriksen et al. 1985; Hasbroucq et al. 1999; Meckler et al. 2017). These partial activations are typically followed by an error-related negativity (ERN) in the electroencephalographic (EEG) signal (Scheffers et al. 1996; Vidal et al. 2000; Meckler et al. 2017), and intracerebral recordings demonstrate that the ERN is elicited in supplementary motor area (SMA) and pre-SMA/rostral cingulate (Bonini et al. 2014), thereby establishing a direct link between a component of motor output (partial activation) and frontal lobe structures involved in performance monitoring and metacognition (Carter et al. 1998; Coull et al. 2016; Fleming et al. 2018). Notably, variations in error-related EEG potentials have also been recently linked to subjective confidence in perceptual decisions (Boldt and Yeung 2015). Taken together, these findings suggest a hypothesis in which partial activations are specifically associated with modulation of retrospective confidence but not task performance (there is no prior evidence that partial activations impact discrimination accuracy).

Here, we recorded EMG activity of response agonists while participants performed a difficult perceptual discrimination task by pressing the appropriate key with the left or right thumb. After each trial, they were required to verbally provide their confidence in their response. We hypothesized that, consistent with models in which confidence integrates information across the perception-action cycle, partial activations might impact upon confidence over and above performance.


Results


Overview of the methods

We analysed data from 19 participants (see Materials and Methods for details) who performed a perceptual discrimination task described in. On each trial, a low-contrast grating was presented centrally for 33 ms. Participants were instructed to indicate, as quickly as possible, whether the grating was oriented vertically or horizontally by pressing the appropriate response key with the right or the left thumb. During each trial, EMG activity of the ‘flexor pollicis brevis’ of each thumb and force production were recorded. After making their decision, subjects were asked to rate their confidence verbally on a scale from 1 (low confidence) to 4 (high confidence). Each subject performed 699 trials evenly split into 10 blocks separated by self-paced rest periods. During a preliminary calibration block, stimulus contrast was manipulated with a 1-up-3-down staircase procedure expected to yield 80% correct responses. On each trial, participants were also allowed to report if they consciously detected making an error. These trials (3.3% of the total number of trials) were omitted from further analysis.

EMG traces were inspected off-line, trial by trial, as displayed on a computer screen and the onsets of the changes in activity were hand-scored. After visual inspection, 4.3% of the trials were rejected because of tonic activity or artefacts. Trials with more than one partial activation (5.7% of the trials) were discarded from further analysis. Remaining trials (11 471, mean = 604 per subject, SD = 64) were classified into three categories: trials without partial activation (mean = 83%, SD = 0.09), trials with a partial activation ipsilateral to the provided response (mean = 8.5%, SD = 0.05) and trials with a partial activation contralateral to the provided response (mean = 8.3%, SD = 0.06). The average time course of EMG for trials with and without partial activation is shown in. Reaction time (RT) was measured between the onset of the stimulus and the onset of the required motor response. As expected, partial activations were more frequent among the slowest trials, on which there is more time for them to occur (mean RT for trials without partial activation = 626 ms, SD = 144 ms; mean RT for trials with ipsilateral partial activation = 810 ms, SD = 187 ms; mean RT for trials with contralateral partial activation = 755 ms, SD = 174 ms). Mean accuracy for the orientation discrimination was 80% (SD = 11%), and mean confidence was 2.6 (SD = 0.32).


Results: impact of partial activations on confidence and accuracy


Confidence

We analysed the effects of partial activation on confidence within a hierarchical linear mixed-effects model, including the intercept, partial activation (separately according to whether it is ipsilateral or contralateral to the response), response accuracy, force production and reaction time as fixed and random effects (see Materials and Methods for details). Both reaction time and force production were entered as covariates. Results of the regression analysis are reported in. As expected, confidence was higher for correct versus error trials (β = 0.60, SE = 0.055, P < 0.001) and faster versus slower responses (β = −2.3, SE = 0.18, P < 0.001) (Henmon 1911; Baranski and Petrusic 1998; Kiani et al. 2014). Crucially, there was also a significant effect of partial activation on confidence: participants reported higher confidence for trials with compared to without partial activation. Interestingly, this effect was similar for ipsilateral (β = 0.15, SE = 0.040, P = 0.002) and contralateral (β = 0.16, SE = 0.049, P = 0.004) partial activations (effect size of ∼0.15 confidence SD). Thus, while partial activations were associated with a significant effect on confidence, the congruency between partial activation and response had no effect on confidence. Finally, confidence was also higher when responses were provided with stronger force (β = 0.33, SE = 0.11, P = 0.007).

To further understand the drivers of the partial activation effect on confidence, we visualized confidence and accuracy data as a function of partial activation and response time. The lower panel of illustrates a consistent boost in confidence within a majority of RT quantiles on trials with partial activations. Interestingly, inspection of indicated that the effect of partial activations on confidence effect was most prominent for the slowest RT quantiles, suggesting an interaction between RT and partial activation.

To formally test for such an effect, we replicated the previous analysis, now including an interaction term between RT and partial activation (complete results are presented in.1). We indeed found a significant interaction between RT and contralateral partial activations (β = 0.40, SE = 0.17, P = 0.004), with a similar trend for ipsilateral activations (β = 0.50, SE = 0.26, P = 0.07). An interaction between RT and partial activations might be explained by fewer partial activations among fast trials, resulting in a lack of sufficient statistical power to detect their potential effect on confidence. Alternatively, it might be partial activations become a cue to confidence specifically on longer trials (see.1). The current data do not allow us to decide between these two explanations.


Accuracy

We analysed the effects of partial activation on accuracy within a hierarchical linear mixed-effects model, including the intercept, partial activation (ipsilateral or contralateral), as well as force production and reaction time as fixed and random predictors. Again, reaction time and force production were entered as covariates. Results of the regression analysis are reported in. Accuracy was higher for faster responses (β = −2.3, SE = 0.40, P < 0.001). Importantly, however, partial activations, either ipsilateral or contralateral, were unrelated to accuracy on a trial-by-trial basis (all Ps > 0.35). Force production also had no significant effect on accuracy (P = 0.49). We reasoned that a null result of partial activation on accuracy could be attributed to a lack of statistical power for this analysis. However, it is difficult to provide a precise answer to this issue, as we do not have a clear idea of what effect size we should expect for the impact of partial activations. Post hoc power analysis based on 5000 simulations using the simR package in R (Green and MacLeod 2016) reveals that an effect size of −0.4 (observed effect size: β = −0.11) for ipsilateral partial activations would have had an 80% chance of being detected in our study at the 5% level. Likewise, an effect size of 0.4 (observed effect size: β = 0.14) for contralateral partial activations would have had a 76% chance of being detected.

As for confidence, visual inspection of suggests a possible interaction effect between RT and partial activations on accuracy. Including an interaction term between RT and partial activations, we found a negative main effect of ipsilateral activations (β = −0.40, SE = 0.16, P < 0.01), qualified by a positive interaction with RT (β = 1.2, SE = 0.47, P = 0.009) such that the fastest responses were associated with worse accuracy. No main effects (β = −0.22, SE = 0.14, P = 0.13) or interactions with RT were found for contralateral activations (β = −0.32, SE = 0.62, P = 0.61) (see.3 and.2).


Discussion

Recent studies suggest that the motor system contributes to perceptual confidence above and beyond perceptual evidence (Fleming et al. 2015; Palser et al. 2018). It has also been shown that partial muscular activations of response effectors in between-hand choice reaction time tasks are typically followed by an error-related negativity (Ne) in the EEG signal (Scheffers et al. 1996; Vidal et al. 2000; Meckler et al. 2017) elicited in SMA and pre-SMA/rostral cingulate (Bonini et al. 2014). Taken together, these findings led us to design a pre-registered experiment postulating that partial muscular activation of response effectors would have a specific impact on perceptual confidence, over and above any effect on first-order performance (Saez Garcia et al. 2017). We remained agnostic about the direction of this effect (i.e. whether partial activations would boost or reduce confidence).

Our results give support to our main hypothesis. More precisely, we found that subjects systematically report higher confidence levels for trials with ipsilateral or contralateral partial activations. Notably, the results for first-order performance were quite distinct to that on confidence: we observed a negative relation between ipsilateral (but not contralateral) activations and accuracy, together with a positive interaction with response time. This pattern suggests that partial activations, or some internal variable covarying with them, have independent influences on confidence, over and above their impact on accuracy. Because accuracy and confidence do not covary in the presence of partial activations, one might wonder whether partial activations also impair metacognitive sensitivity. We tested for this assumption by measuring the impact of the average number of partial activations across trials on individual metacognitive efficiency, measured by the meta-d’/d’ ratio (Maniscalco and Lau 2012) implemented in R by the metaSDT package (Craddock 2018). The results of an OLS regression did not reveal any significant evidence of a relation between partial activations and metacognitive efficiency (β= −0.34, SE = 0.63, P = 0.60). This negative result might of course be due to the small number of trials available with partial activations and the likely small size effect (if any), and should thus be taken with caution.

Interestingly, it has been shown that bounded accumulation models predict that higher within-trial evidence variability may lead to increases in confidence and reductions in accuracy (Zylberberg et al. 2016), thereby generating a pattern close to that obtained for ipsilateral partial activations in the current study. It might thus be tempting to conjecture that partial activations simply reflect a more volatile sensory signal. Given that we used near-threshold, briefly presented grating stimuli, we are unable to directly evaluate evidence variability in the current design. However, the bounded accumulation model also predicts that more noisy evidence induces faster decisions. Thus, if partial activations were to reflect more volatile information, they should correspond to faster trials. In fact here we observe the opposite: responses are slower for trials with partial activation (mean = 780 ms, SD = 184 ms) than for trials without partial activation (mean = 626 ms, SD = 144 ms). In other words, the relation between partial activations, accuracy and confidence appears not to be explained by the strength of the sensory evidence (which would have a parallel impact on both accuracy and confidence), nor by its variability.

While we are unable to exclude that partial activation might be driven by some other component of the sensory signal that simultaneously influences confidence but not accuracy, because partial activations occur well before the decision, a causal impact of subthreshold motor activations on confidence seems plausible. An alternative hypothesis is that such “early” effects of motor activation may indicate that they influence metacognitive evaluation in the same manner as faster responses, acting as a cue to higher confidence. Indeed, it has been shown that response times directly affect confidence levels in perceptual discrimination (Kiani et al. 2014). Under this explanation, we should observe an impact of the timing of partial activations on confidence, with earlier activations corresponding to higher confidence levels. To test this hypothesis, we repeated our previous analysis, adding the onset time of the first muscular activation (absolute pre-motor time, Apmt) as a predictor in the regression. Note that in the absence of partial activation, Apmt corresponds to the earliest detectable time of the actual response. In opposition to an explanation based on response timing, shorter Apmt values had no significant impact on confidence level (β = −0.19, SE = 0.22, P = 0.39). Therefore, the influence of partial activation on confidence cannot be explained by the fact that they occur earlier than the final response (see.2). This suggests that partial activation represents a distinct influence on confidence, rather than another marker of faster responding.

Our results build on and extend previous studies suggesting that the motor system itself contributes to metacognitive judgements in decision-making (Fleming et al. 2015; Siedlecka et al. 2016, 2018a,b; Palser et al. 2018). However, our study represents the first to demonstrate a specific association between subthreshold motor activation—as measured using EMG—and perceptual confidence.

It should be stressed that the link between partial activation and confidence was independent of the congruence of the provided response: subjects consistently reported higher confidence in trials where either ipsilateral or contralateral partial activations were present. This is in line with a recent study showing that subjects’ stimulus awareness in a discrimination task (which is presumably related to perceptual confidence) is increased when they are required to provide a lateralized motor response unrelated to the task before answering (Siedlecka et al. 2018a). In contrast, it has been previously shown that single-pulse TMS increases confidence when applied to the hemisphere associated to the chosen response, but decreases it when applied to the hemisphere associated to the alternative response (Fleming et al. 2015). One potential account of these seemingly conflicting results is that partial motor activations and pre-motor TMS affect confidence judgements through distinct mechanisms. It has been shown that partial activations are followed by a ERN (Meckler et al. 2017) originating in SMA proper (Bonini et al. 2014), a structure involved in performance monitoring (Coull et al. 2016). It might thus be the case that partial activations are interpreted as efficiently corrected errors, leading to higher confidence in the final decision. In contrast, stimulation of lateralized pre-motor cortex is more likely to directly influence the representations associated with a particular response, and therefore influence confidence in an asymmetric manner. Our data do not provide the means to directly test this explanation, and further research, potentially combining motor TMS with measurement of partial activation, is needed to understand the relation between these effects.

In summary, our findings contribute to growing evidence that confidence in perceptual decisions not only depends on feedforward sensory evidence, but also depends on motor information. They also suggest that different components of motor output might contribute differently to confidence. Together our findings are broadly consistent with “second-order” models in which metacognitive confidence integrates information across the perception-action cycle (Fleming and Daw 2017). We cannot rule out that partial activations are caused by a latent sensory variable that simultaneously and independently boosts confidence—although we are not aware of a model along these lines that would be consistent with our results. Much remains to be done to understand how exactly these components are combined and processed into metacognitive judgements.


Methods and Materials


Participants

Sample size was based on previous published study investigating the role of pre-motor activation on confidence (Fleming et al. 2015). We decided prior to data collection to ensure data analysis would be possible for between 16 and 25 participants. A total of 27 participants with normal or corrected to normal vision and no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders thus participated in the study. Five participants were excluded before analysis either because the EMG signal was too noisy (two participants), they did not comply with the instructions (two participants) or they failed to accomplish the task (one participant). Furthermore, three outliers were excluded because they displayed multiple activations in >70% of the trials (two participants), or used the highest level of confidence in >80% of the trials (one participant). We thus analysed data of 19 participants in the final sample (11 females, 7 males; mean age = 23 years, SD=3.7). We note that results are qualitatively similar if outliers are not excluded (see 2). Data will be made available on Open Science Framework.


Stimuli and procedure

The experiment was carried out at the Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, in Marseille (France). Participants performed the experiment in a dark and sound-shielded Faraday cage. They were seated 100 cm in front of a 15-inch CRT monitor with a refresh rate of 60 Hz. Response buttons were be fixed on the top of two plastic cylinders (diameter 3 cm, height 7.5 cm), 20 cm apart. Participants responded by exerting at least 600 mg of pressure on a button. Responses were confirmed by audio feedback.

Stimuli were generated using the Psychopy library for Python (Peirce 2009). Each trial started with a fixation cross, displayed for 300 ms. It was followed by a low-contrast grating randomly oriented either horizontally or vertically, and presented centrally for 33 ms (4° diameter). Participants were instructed to indicate, as quickly as possible, whether the grating was vertically or horizontally oriented by pressing the appropriate response key with their right or left thumb. The association between grating orientation (horizontal or vertical) and response key (left or right) was counterbalanced across subjects. Responses faster than 1500 ms were confirmed by a message reporting the provided answer (horizontal or vertical) displayed for 500 ms. Responses longer than 1500 ms were omitted from analysis and feedback was provided to the subject signalling that her answer was too slow. After confirmation of the response, subjects were asked to loudly rate their confidence from 1 (low confidence) to 4 (high confidence) while a scale ranging from 1 to 4 was displayed on the screen for 2500 ms. If they consciously detected making a mistake they were asked to say “error” instead of their confidence level. Responses were recorded and written down by the experimenter, who was outside the room where the participants sat. Each trial lasted 4333 ms.

For each participant, stimulus contrast was individually adjusted in a preliminary session using a 1-up-3-down staircase procedure. The experiment consisted of 699 trials, split into nine blocks of 70 trials each and one block of 69 trials. Rest periods between each block were self-paced.


EMG and force recording

EMG activity was recorded continuously from pre-amplified Ag/AgCl electrodes (Biosemi® Active-Two electrodes®, Amsterdam), pasted onto the skin of the thenar eminence over the ‘flexor pollicis brevis’ of each thumb, about 2 cm apart. The common reference electrode was situated above the first vertebra. The signal was filtered and digitized online (bandwidth: 0–268 Hz, 3 dB/octave, sampling rate: 1024 Hz). The experimenter continuously monitored the signal and asked subjects to relax their muscles if the signal became noisy.

The thumb force production was measured as a force signal and digitized on line (A/D rate 2 kHz) allowing us to record the force applied by the participant and trigger a response signal when a force threshold of 600 g is exceeded.


Data analysis

No statistical analyses were conducted prior to having completed the collection of data for all participants. The protocol was registered on Open Science Framework before starting the experiment (Saez Garcia et al. 2017).


EMG analysis

The recorded EMG signals were analysed off-line. The trace corresponding to the EMG was displayed on the computer screen and the EMG onsets were hand-scored. Importantly, at this stage the experimenter was unaware of the confidence scores registered separately, avoiding any bias in analysis. Reaction time was measured between the onset of the stimulus and the required motor response. We also defined Absolute Pre-Motor Time (Apmt) as the delay between the onset of the stimuli and the beginning of the first muscular activation.


Trials exclusions

Force production was not registered for 50 trials (0.4% of the total number of trials), due to the force peak latency occurring >1500 ms following stimulus onset. After visual inspection, 715 trials (5.4% of the total number of trials) were discarded from further analysis due to the presence of tonic activity or artefacts. Trials reported as errors by subjects were also disregarded (442 trials, 3.3% of the total number of trials). Finally, trials with more than one partial activation were excluded in initial analyses (779 trials, 5.9% of the total number of trials), but were included in the regression analysis reported in.2, S2.3 and S3.3. In our primary analyses, we excluded a total of 1810 trials (13.6%), and analysed 11 471 trials (mean = 604 per subject, SD = 64).


Statistical procedure

The influence of partial activation on confidence and accuracy was analysed with hierarchical linear and generalized mixed-effects models, respectively, using the lmer4 package (Bates et al. 2015) in R (version 4.2, R core Team 2017). All regressions were performed with the restricted maximum likelihood fitting method, and P values for coefficients were obtained with the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova et al. 2017). We used an alpha level of 0.05 for all statistical tests.

Predictors were coded using treatment contrasts (thus “accuracy” takes a value of 1 if the trial is correct, and 0 otherwise, “ipsilateral” takes a value of 1 if there is a partial ipsilateral activation, and 0 otherwise; “contralateral” takes value of 1 if there is a partial contralateral activation, and 0 otherwise). Reaction time and Absolute Pre-Motor Time (Apmt) were measured in seconds. Force was measured in kilograms. Reaction time, Absolute Pre-Motor Time and force are median-centred. To keep models tractable, we assumed zero correlation between random effects.

We checked that results were robust to the inclusion of outliers (2) and we replicated all analyses using Bayesian methods as implemented in the Brms package in R (3) (Bürkner 2016).


Memories of near-death experiences: are they self-defining?

H Cassol, A D’Argembeau, V Charland-Verville, S Laureys, C Martial — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6397322, CC BY 4.0.

Some people report memories of near-death experiences (NDEs) after facing situations of impending death and these memories appear to have significant consequences on their lives (here referred to as “real NDE experiencers”; real NDErs). We assessed to what extent NDE memories are considered self-defining: memories that help people to define clearly how they see themselves. We screened 71 participants using the Greyson NDE scale (48 real NDErs and 23 NDErs-like who had lived a similar experience in absence of a threat to their life). Participants described their two main self-defining memories (SDMs). For each SDM, they completed the Centrality of Event Scale (CES) to assess how central the event is to their identity. The two subgroups did not differ regarding the proportion of NDErs who recalled their NDE (30 real NDErs out of 48 and 11 NDErs-like out of 23). Real NDErs and NDErs-like who recalled their NDE (n = 41) reported richer experiences as assessed by the Greyson NDE scale. Furthermore, these participants rated their NDE memory as more central to their identity as compared to other SDMs, and the richness of the NDE memory was positively associated to its centrality (CES scores). Overall, these findings suggest that the self-defining aspect of the experience might be related to its phenomenological content rather than its circumstances of occurrence. The self-defining status of NDE memories confirms that they constitute an important part of NDErs’ personal identity and highlights the importance for clinicians to facilitate their integration within the self.

Keywords: near-death experiences, near-death experiences-like, self-defining memories, autobiographical memory, Centrality of Event Scale


Introduction

Near-Death Experiences (NDEs) are profound psychological events with highly emotional and self-related content, generally occurring when people come close to death (Greyson 2000a). Typically, these experiences encompass affective, cognitive, transcendental, and paranormal elements such as, in order of frequency of occurrence: an intense feeling of peacefulness and pleasantness, an out-of-body experience, the vision of a very bright light, an altered time perception, the sensation of entering an unearthly world, or a sense of harmony and unity with the universe (Greyson 1983; Charland-Verville et al. 2014). Studies have highlighted that 6–23% of cardiac arrest survivors report a NDE, indicating that it is a frequent phenomenon (Parnia et al. 2001; Schwaninger et al. 2002). Intriguingly, similar experiences have been described after situations that do not imply any danger for physical or mental health (Charland-Verville et al. 2014). These experiences have been termed “NDEs-like” and have been described in contexts such as meditative states or syncope (Lempert et al. 1994; Beauregard et al. 2009). To date, no theory has been able to fully account for the whole NDE phenomenon. However, several hypotheses have been formulated regarding the role of psychological factors, notably higher dissociative symptoms and fantasy proneness in people who have lived these experiences (so-called NDE experiencers or NDErs; Greyson 2000b; Martial et al. 2018), as well as neuropsychological mechanisms (Jansen 1990; Timmermann et al. 2018).

Along with its particular circumstances of appearance and its mystical connotation, the NDE phenomenon seems to be characterized by a rich phenomenology and a sense of realness (Martial et al. 2017; Moore and Greyson 2017). Consequently, NDEs appear to have short- and long-term consequences on people’s lives (Greyson 1997; Van Lommel et al. 2001). Some authors have described a pattern of change comprising a reduced fear of death, a greater care and compassion towards others or a diminished value of material possessions (Ring 1984; Groth-Marnat and Summers 1998). Given their significance and consequentiality, NDE memories appear to share similarities with a particular type of autobiographical memories referred to as self-defining memories (SDMs; Blagov and Singer 2004). SDMs are emotionally intense, vivid, and frequently recalled memories that reflect important themes and conflicts in a person’s life (Singer and Salovey 1993). These emotional memories are the building blocks of identity and contribute, in particular, to the sense of self-continuity (Conway et al. 2004), which relies on the ability to consider oneself as an entity that extends back into the past and forward into the future (Chandler 1994). This ability is central to numerous processes such as planning future actions, giving meaning to new experiences or taking responsibility (Sani 2008).

SDMs can be characterized along four dimensions: (i) their specificity, which refers to the structure of the memory; (ii) the presence of meaning making, which reflects the individual’s propensity to derive personal meaning and reflect upon the experience; (iii) their content, which makes reference to the primary concern of the experience; and (iv) the associated affect, which represents the emotions felt upon recall (see for a more detailed description; Blagov and Singer 2004). From a clinical perspective, scholars have shown that the recall of emotionally positive SDMs as well as the ability to integrate a lesson or derive meaning from an experience are related to higher levels of psychological adjustments in healthy individuals (Blagov and Singer 2004; Wood and Conway 2006). Hence, careful consideration should be given to the development of these capacities of integration and autobiographical reasoning, especially when attempting to (re)build a sense of self-continuity (Inder et al. 2008). This integration process seems particularly important after intense life-threatening experiences such as NDEs.

This study therefore seeks to determine if NDE memories may be considered as self-defining. First, because of their documented life-transforming effects and their reported importance (Greyson 1997), we predicted that a majority of NDErs would describe their NDE as one of their two main SDMs. To do so, NDErs completed an online survey on their SDMs. In order to determine whether the potential self-defining dimension of NDEs is due to their phenomenal content or their circumstances of appearance (i.e. presence or absence of impending death), we also included a subgroup of NDErs-like (i.e. people who experienced a NDE in absence of life threat). Second, we expected that NDEs memories would be considered as more central to NDErs’ identity and life story as compared to the other recalled SDM. To test this hypothesis, the Centrality of Event Scale (CES; Berntsen and Rubin 2006), which assesses how central an event is to a person’s identity, was administered. We also looked at the association between the intensity of the NDE, as measured by the Greyson NDE scale developed to quantify the self-reported richness of the experience (Greyson 1983), and its centrality to NDErs’ selves. Finally, we explored the four dimensions of reported SDMs with a particular attention to meaning making and affect, which are crucial to psychological well-being.


Materials and Methods


Participants

Participants were initially recruited following calls for NDE testimonies via the websites, the appearances in local media, and the publications of the International Associations for Near-Death Studies (IANDS) and the Coma Science Group (GIGA-Consciousness, University and University Hospital of Liège, Belgium). People who contacted us to share a written narrative of their experience were mailed questionnaires including the Greyson NDE scale (Greyson 1983), used to identify the presence of a NDE memory by assessing the presence of specific affective, cognitive, transcendental, and paranormal features. This 16-item multiple-choice validated scale enables to quantify the richness of the experience (i.e. total score ranging from 0 to 32) and allows a standardized identification of NDEs (i.e. cut-off score of 7). For each item, scores are arranged on an ordinal scale ranging from 0 to 2 (i.e. 0 = “not present,” 1 = “mildly or ambiguously present,” and 2 = “definitively present”; Greyson 1983). Additionally, they completed questionnaires requesting socio-demographic information (gender, age at interview, and religious belief at the time of the NDE—religious or non-religious), their age when they experienced the NDE, the time elapsed since the NDE, and the circumstances of appearance of their NDE. On this basis, they were assigned to two subgroups: a “real NDE” subgroup (i.e. experiences equal or above the cut-off score of 7 that occurred following a severe brain injury accompanied by a period of coma >1 h and an hospitalization in an intensive care unit) or a “NDE-like” subgroup (i.e. similar phenomenological experiences equal or above the cut-off score of 7 that occurred in situations where there was no genuine threat to the individual’s life; Charland-Verville et al. 2014). Once the participants were divided into two subgroups, they were re-contacted and invited to participate in another study focusing on SDMs. The final study sample was composed of 48 individuals who reported having lived a “real NDE” and 23 individuals who described a “NDE-like.”

The study was approved and carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the ethics committee of the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Liège. All participants completed a written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.


Materials


Self-defining memory task

Participants were invited to describe their two main SDMs. It was not specified whether or not one of them should be their NDE since we wanted to determine the proportion of NDErs who would spontaneously mention their NDE as one of their main SDMs. All participants wrote down their two main SDMs in any order (i.e. without constraints regarding the chronology or the subjective importance of the recalled memories) and with no limit regarding the number of words. To do so, they received a written definition of a SDM: (i) the memory has to be at least 1-year-old (in order to better gauge the impact of an event, one has to have a sufficient hindsight regarding what he/she has experienced; it should be underlined that this criterion could not have impacted the number of NDEs recalled since all NDErs had experienced their NDE more than one year before completing the survey); (ii) it has to be a very clear memory of an important event that was personally experienced; (iii) it helps understanding who one is as an individual; (iv) it relates to a personally significant and enduring theme or concern, and it is linked to other memories that share the same theme; (v) it generates strong feelings, no matter the valence; and (vi) it has been recalled a great number of times (adapted from Singer and Moffitt 1991–1992; Blagov and Singer 2004).


Affect

Participants indicated on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from −3 (very negative) to +3 (very positive): (i) emotions felt during the event and (ii) emotions felt while remembering the event and thinking about its consequences on their lives (questions derived from the validated Memory Characteristic Questionnaire; Johnson et al. 1988).


Centrality of event scale

This instrument measures how central an event is to a person’s identity and life story, with 20 items rated on a 5-point scale (from 1 = totally disagree to 5 = totally agree). Items 1, 2, 4, 9, 12, 13, 17, and 20 have been developed to assess whether an event has become a reference point for the generation of expectations and attribution of meaning to other events in one’s life story. Items 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 19 were designed to assess whether an event is considered as a central component of the person’s identity. Finally, items 10, 14, 15, 16, and 18 address whether the event is considered by the respondent as a turning point in his/her life story (Berntsen and Rubin 2006).


Procedure

After initial recruitment (see Participants section), participants of both subgroups (“real NDE” and “NDE-like”) were invited to participate in a study on SDMs. They received an email with a link to an online survey: (i) they completed an online consent form including a description of the study; (ii) they answered items related to socio-demographic data; (iii) they completed the SDM task; (iv) finally, for each of their two SDMs, they rated the associated affect and completed the CES. The order of rating of the two SDMs was randomized: part of the participants rated the first recalled SDM as a first step and then the second recalled SDM, while the other participants rated their SDMs in the reverse order. The order of SDM rating was randomized to circumvent a possible bias: we assumed that most participants would recall their NDE memory first and we wanted to minimize possible order effects in describing and assessing SDMs.


Analyses

Results were considered to be significant at an alpha of 0.05 and were expressed as mean (M) ± standard deviation (SD) for normally distributed quantitative variables and as median (Mdn) [inter-quartile range (IQR)] for quantitative variables with a skewed distribution. Categorical variables were expressed as counts and proportions (%). Data analyses were carried out using R statistical software (R 3.4.1).


Demographics and questionnaires

As a first step, we compared the gender and religious beliefs ratios between “real NDEs” and “NDEs-like” by means of a Fisher’s exact test with contingency tables. Student’s t-tests were used to compare reported intensity of the NDE (Greyson NDE scale total scores), age at NDE, and age at interview between subgroups. Distributions being skewed, differences for time since NDE were analyzed using Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney U tests. Finally, percentages of NDErs who recalled their NDE were calculated for each subgroup and a Fisher’s exact test was performed to compare ratios between subgroups.

As a second step, all participants were divided into two subgroups depending on whether or not they recalled their NDE (no matter its context of occurrence). We compared the gender ratio between the “NDE recalled” and the “NDE not recalled” subgroups with a Fisher’s exact test. Intensity of the NDE (Greyson NDE total scores), age at NDE, age at interview and time since NDE were compared by means of Student’s t-tests. represents the flowchart of the distribution of NDErs within the different subgroups.


Dimensions of self-defining memories

First, we examined the centrality of events for identity and life story (as assessed by the CES scale) in the “NDE recalled” subgroup. Differences in CES total scores between the NDE memory and the other SDM were assessed using a Student’s t-test. Next, we examined associative strength between CES and Greyson NDE scale total scores for the NDE memories using a Spearman’s correlation.

Second, ratings of affect were compared between NDE memories and other SDMs, using a Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney U test.

Third, two coders (HC and CM) scored the four dimensions of all reported SDMs (n = 142). The specificity of each SDM was classified in three categories: (i) specific events that happened in a particular time and place and lasted less than 24 h; (ii) extended events that lasted longer than a day; and (iii) generic events that occurred repeatedly. The number of observed agreements was 138 out of 142 (97.18%), which corresponds to a Cohen’s kappa coefficient of 0.89 (95% confidence intervals 0.79–1). The presence (score of 1) or absence (score of 0) of meaning making in each narrative was also determined. The number of observed agreements was 135 out of 142 reported SDM narratives (95%), which corresponds to a Cohen’s kappa coefficient of 0.90 (95% confidence intervals 0.83–0.97). To examine whether NDE memories differed from the other SDMs in terms of meaning making, a Pearson’s chi-squared test was used to assess frequency distribution of meaning making among the two types of memories. Finally, coders proceeded to the rating of the content of SDMs based on the classification proposed by Thorne and McLean (2001). This classification includes seven major categories: (i) life-threatening events, (ii) recreation/exploration, (iii) relationship, (iv) achievement/mastery (either with positive or negative outcomes), (v) guilt/shame, (vi) drug/alcohol abuse, and (vii) “not classifiable.” Additionally, a subclassification of life-threatening events was used, as suggested by Thorne and McLean (2001): (a) death or serious illness/injury of someone else (person or animal), (b) serious accidents or illnesses of oneself, (c) physical assault, (d) rape, attempted rape, or sexual abuse (to oneself), (e) “not classifiable” life-threatening events. The number of observed agreements for all SDMs was 135 out of 142 (95% of the observations), which corresponds to a Cohen’s kappa coefficient of 0.94 (95% confidence intervals 0.90–0.98). For all dimensions, discrepancies between raters were discussed in order to reach a final classification of all the narratives.


Results


Demographics and questionnaires

The “real NDE” subgroup (n = 48) included NDEs that occurred following a life-threatening situation such as anoxia (e.g. cardiac arrest, near-drowning; n = 19), trauma (e.g. motor vehicle accident, falls; n = 14), and other events (non-traumatic events such as complication during surgery; n = 15). The “NDE-like” subgroup (n = 23) included NDEs that occurred following a non-life-threatening event such as sleep (n = 5), syncope (n = 5), drug and alcohol consumption, (n = 3) or other non-life-threatening situations (e.g. grief, migraine; n = 10). No significant differences were found between “real NDEs” and “NDEs-like” in terms of gender, Greyson NDE total scores, age at NDE, age at interview, and time since NDE.

Overall, 58% of the total sample recalled the NDE as one of their two main SDMs (41 participants out of 71), respectively 30 NDErs out of 48 in the “real NDE” subgroup vs. 11 NDErs out of 23 in the “NDE-like” subgroup. The Fisher’s exact test did not show a significant difference between subgroups regarding the ratio of participants recalling the experience (P = 0.307; ϕ = −0.139).

“NDE recalled” and “NDE not recalled” subgroups did not significantly differ in regard to gender, age at NDE, age at interview and time since NDE. In contrast the “NDE recalled” subgroup showed higher total scores on the Greyson NDE scale.


Dimensions of SDMs

Analysis of the CES scores carried out on the “NDE recalled” subgroup (n = 41; 30 real NDErs and 11 NDErs-like) showed that NDE memories received higher CES total scores (Mdn = 92, IQR = 87–96) than other SDMs (Mdn = 75, IQR = 59–84) (P < 0.001; r = −0.574). Moreover, a significant positive correlation was found between CES scores for the NDE memory and Greyson NDE scale total scores (rs = 0.48, P = 0.001).

Regarding affect, the analyses showed that emotions felt during the event were more positive for NDE memories (Mdn = 7, IQR = 6–7) compared to other SDMs (Mdn = 4, IQR = 1–6) (P < 0.001; r = −0.430). Moreover, emotions felt upon recall were also considered more positive for NDE memories (Mdn = 7, IQR = 6–7) compared to other SDMs (Mdn = 6, IQR = 4–7) (P < 0.001; r = −0.346).

The classification of the specificity of all SDMs (n = 142) indicated that participants reported 122 specific SDMs (<24 h; 86%), 14 extended SDMs (>24 h; 10%), and 6 generic SDMs (repeated events; 4%). All NDE memories were specific.

Meaning making was detected in 62 of the 142 SDMs (44%). The difference in ratio of meaning making between NDE memories (21 out of 41; 51%) and other SDMs (41 out of 101; 41%) was not statistically significant (P = 0.267; ϕ = 0.097).

Finally, regarding memory content, NDEs recalled by real NDErs (n = 30) were all classified as serious accidents or illnesses to oneself (despite containing additional transcendental and paranormal components as compared to other life-threatening events, as assessed by the Greyson NDE scale) and NDEs recalled by NDErs-like were classified as exploration events (i.e. experiencing an unexpected spiritual moment; n = 10) or events relating to drug use (n = 1). The classification of all reported SDMs (including NDEs and NDEs-like; n = 142) consisted of 68 memories of life-threatening events (48%), 30 memories relating to relationships (21%; e.g. life-changing encounter, child birth, or family/friend reunion after a long separation), 19 memories centered on exploration (13%; e.g. facing personal challenges), 18 memories that emphasize achievement (13%; e.g. professional recognition and promotion or difficult child birth), and 3 memories about feelings of guilt/shame (2%), 3 unclassifiable events (2%), and 1 event relating to drug use (1%). Subclassification of the 68 life-threatening events included 42 events of serious accidents or illnesses to oneself (62%; e.g. learning to live in an handicapped body after severe accident or survival during times of war), 18 events of deaths or serious illnesses/injuries of someone else (26%; e.g. death in the family or illness of a child), 7 events relating to physical assault (10%; e.g. domestic violence), and 1 unclassifiable event (2%). The distribution of the 142 memories within the seven main categories is presented in.

Overall, when examining the number of participants who recalled each type of content, we found that NDE memories constituted by far the most important category, as they were recalled by 41 participants (58% of the participants). The second most frequently reported subcategory of event was the “death of a family member” which was reported by 18% of participants (n = 13), followed by a “life-changing encounter” (n = 7; 10%), “domestic violence” (n = 6; 8%), “family/friend reunion after a long separation” (n = 5; 7%), and “learning to live in an handicapped body after severe accident”, and “confrontational relationships” (both reported by four participants; 6%). “Academic success,” “child births,” “facing personal challenges,” and “forced exile during times of war” were each reported by three participants (4%). “Difficult child birth,” “getting out of a depression,” “illness of a child,” “moment of extreme shame,” “physical assault” (as an aggressor), and “professional promotions” were each reported by two participants (3%).

The distribution of the other (non-NDE) SDMs (n = 41) reported by the “NDE recalled” subgroup (i.e. real NDErs and NDErs-like who recalled their NDE as one of their two main SDMs) among the 7 major categories included 16 life-threatening events (39%), 11 events relating to relationships (27%), 7 events that emphasize achievement (17%), 4 events centered on exploration (10%), 2 unclassifiable events (5%), and 1 event relating to guilt/shame (2%). The drug, alcohol, and tobacco use category was not represented in this subgroup. Subclassification of the 16 life-threatening events included 7 events of serious accidents or illnesses to oneself (44%), 6 events of deaths or serious illnesses/injuries of someone else (37%), and 3 events relating to physical assault (19%). The other subcategories were not represented in the subgroup.

Lastly, the distribution of the SDMs (n = 60) reported by the “NDE not recalled” subgroup (i.e. real NDErs and NDErs-like who did not recall their NDE as one of their two main SDMs). This classification comprised 22 life-threatening events (37%), 19 events relating to relationships (32%), 7 events that emphasize achievement (12%), 5 events centered on exploration (8%), 2 events relating to guilt/shame (3%), and 1 unclassifiable event (2%). The drug, alcohol, and tobacco use category was not represented in this subgroup. Subclassification of the 22 life-threatening events included 12 events of deaths or serious illnesses/injuries of someone else (55%), 5 events of serious accidents or illnesses to oneself (23%), 4 events relating to physical assault (18%), and 1 unclassifiable event (4%). The other subcategories were not represented in the subgroup.


Discussion

This study investigated whether the memory of a NDE is considered as self-defining. Furthermore, to disentangle between the roles of the nature of the experience and its circumstances of appearance, real NDErs (i.e. presence of a life-threatening event) and NDErs-like (i.e. absence of life threat) described their two most significant SDMs. In line with our hypothesis, 58% of the entire sample recalled their NDE as a SDM, respectively 63% of real NDErs and 48% of NDErs-like. Analyses did not show significant differences in proportions between subgroups. Moreover, when looking closely at the content of NDEs, results indicated that NDErs who selected their NDE as a SDM had lived richer experiences, as measured by the Greyson NDE scale (Greyson 1983). Indeed, it is likely that NDEs with more cognitive, affective, transcendental, and/or paranormal characteristics are experienced more intensely, leading to memories that are more likely to be considered self-defining. Additionally, we found a larger proportion of religious NDErs among participants who recalled their NDE. A possible explanation for this latter finding is that the NDE experience might be perceived as more meaningful for religious NDErs, thus being more likely to be part of their identity. Overall, our results suggest that the self-defining aspect of the NDE memory could be related to its particular phenomenological content rather than its circumstances of occurrence, although future studies are required to clarify/confirm this latter point. Altogether, these results support the view that NDE memories constitute an important part of NDErs’ personal identity and are self-defining. This proposition is also consistent with previous results showing that two-thirds of those who experienced a NDE during a close brush with death describe a substantial impact of this experience on their lives (Noyes 1980). Yet, it has to be borne in mind that the fact that some NDErs did not recall their NDE does not necessarily mean that this experience is not considered self-defining. Indeed, most people can generally recall more than two SDMs and it might be that a higher proportion of NDErs would recall their NDE if they were asked to recount more than two SDMs.

When considering participants who reported their NDE, we found a significant difference between the NDE memory and their other SDM regarding the CES total scores, the memory of the NDE being rated as more central to NDErs’ identities. Our results therefore suggest that NDE memories can be regarded as cornerstones in NDErs’ lives and that they might color the way they understand other experiences or the hardship in their lives. Additionally, richer (in terms of the number of reported features) NDEs were considered as more central to NDErs’ selves. Although this correlation does not demonstrate causality, it is reasonable to hypothesize that richer NDEs may lead to a memory that is more central to the person’s identity. Considering that the richness of the experience appears to be associated with NDErs’ traits (e.g. fantasy proneness; Martial et al. 2018), future studies should investigate to what extent NDE richness might also influence their interpretation and integration into the life story.

When taking a closer look at the dimensions of memories, we found that SDMs were globally pleasant and that NDE memories, in particular, were associated with positive affect upon recall. These results are consistent with the view that NDEs are typically associated with highly positive emotions (Greyson 1983). Regarding the specificity of reported SDMs, we observed that a large majority of memories (86%) involved specific events rather than extended or generic events. This high percentage can be partly explained by the fact that life-threatening events are typically specific. Lardi et al. (2010) have indeed highlighted that life-threatening events were the most specific memories, but they also noted that these events were typically associated with low positive affect and strong negative affect. Therefore, real NDEs seem to be a particular subtype of specific life-threatening events that has the particularity to be associated with positive affects upon recall.

Concerning memory content, half of the sampled memories referred to life-threatening events. The second most frequent type of memories were those in which interpersonal relationships are emphasized, followed by memories of events relating to exploration, memories highlighting effortful endeavor at mastery or accomplishment, and finally events encompassing guilt/shame and drug use themes. With the exception of life-threatening and exploration events that are unsurprisingly frequent in our sample given NDEs and NDEs-like events, the distribution of SDMs into the different categories is similar to some other studies in which memories relating to relationships and achievement concerns were largely represented (e.g. Lardi et al. 2010). In this context, it should also be emphasized that real NDEs memories appear as a unique and specific subtype of “serious accidents or illnesses to oneself” as they comprise distinguishable affective, cognitive, transcendental, and paranormal features, as compared to other events belonging to this subcategory.

In regard to meaning making, it is interesting to note that a majority of SDM narratives did not include meaning making (i.e. 44% of all reported SDMs included meaning making). Additionally, the difference in the prevalence of meaning making between NDE memories (51%) and other SDMs (41%) did not reach significance, which might suggest that autobiographical reasoning could partly depend on the individual rather than on the type of memory (Rubin et al. 2018). The relatively low proportion of meaning making for NDEs is somewhat surprising given that it is considered crucial for psychological adjustment; indeed, the ability to reflect upon one’s life experiences has been associated with higher levels of socio-emotional maturity and is developed in psychotherapy to improve introspection abilities and build a unified self (Inder et al. 2008). Therefore, the development of psychological interventions aiming at facilitating the integration of NDEs into the sense of self and identity might be fruitful for some individuals who have experienced this impactful event.

Finally, some limitations of this study should be acknowledged. Given the relative scarcity of NDEs, we were limited in the recruitment of our participants and our sample is relatively small. Larger studies are therefore required to confirm these results. Besides, because NDErs voluntarily contacted us, our sample suffers from a self-selection bias and one must bear in mind that, considering the mystical connotation of such experiences and the fact that they may be perceived as distressing, some people might feel uncomfortable to share these events. Another possible bias may have arisen from the fact that some participants might have guessed the objectives of the study and recalled their NDE accordingly or, on the contrary, might have felt that we wanted them to provide two memories other than their NDE. Nevertheless, after debriefing, no indication of this potential bias was observed. Finally, to exclude a possible influence of the context of events, future studies should also include a subgroup of individuals who have lived a close brush with death without experiencing a subjective NDE.


Conclusion

The self-defining status of NDE memories reinforces the importance for caregivers to detect the presence of such an event in order to ensure, or at least facilitate, its later integration into NDErs’ selves. As a matter of fact, SDMs play a key role in the construction and maintenance of a coherent sense of self-continuity, which appears to be positively associated to psychological adjustment (Chandler et al. 2003). Highly accessible and vivid personal memories contribute to the construction of life narratives and, in this way, enable the stabilization of the sense of self and identity (Baerger and McAdams 1999). However, the outcome of this process is not systematically positive (Berntsen et al. 2003). A highly negative, unforeseen and relatively uncommon event might have an unfavorable influence on the interpretation of other experiences as well as on expectations about future events, and therefore can be harmful to mental health (Berntsen et al. 2003). Thereupon, it is reasonable to expect that atypical experiences of close brushes with death, such as NDEs, become reference points that could potentially lead to deleterious outcomes such as lower senses of self-continuity typically associated with anxiety and negative affect (Chandler et al. 2003). Overall, our study adds to the growing literature demonstrating the significant consequences of NDEs and highlights the fact that they deserve careful consideration.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data are available upon request.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Psychedelics as a treatment for disorders of consciousness

Gregory Scott, Robin L Carhart-Harris — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6475593, CC BY 4.0.

Based on its ability to increase brain complexity, a seemingly reliable index of conscious level, we propose testing the capacity of the classic psychedelic, psilocybin, to increase conscious awareness in patients with disorders of consciousness. We also confront the considerable ethical and practical challenges this proposal must address, if this hypothesis is to be directly assessed.


Introduction

Disorders of consciousness (DoC) are the most devastating form of impairment that may follow acquired brain injury. In contrast to comatose patients, those in the vegetative state (VS) and minimally conscious state (MCS) exhibit signs of wakefulness (eye opening). VS patients show no overt signs of awareness, whereas MCS patients show minimal but clearly discernible behavioural evidence of awareness. A range of therapies have been proposed for patients with DoC, including pharmacological (e.g. zolpidem, amantadine) (Gosseries et al. 2014), invasive- [e.g. deep brain stimulation (DBS) (Vanhoecke and Hariz 2017), vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) (Corazzol et al. 2017)] and non-invasive electrical stimulation [e.g. transcranial direct current stimulation (Thibaut et al. 2014)], and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) (Pistoia et al. 2013). However, no treatments have consistently shown beneficial effects on conscious awareness or functional recovery (Royal College of Physicians 2013; Giacino et al. 2014; Vanhoecke and Hariz 2017).

Classic psychedelics are currently undergoing significant investigation for the treatment of a range of psychiatric disorders (Carhart-Harris and Goodwin 2017). Here, we propose that the classic psychedelic, psilocybin, be explored as a treatment to increase conscious awareness in patients with DoC. A scientific rationale is proposed based on findings from research into the neurobiology of DoC and the effects of psychedelics. Developments in these hitherto separate fields of inquiry now suggest a potential therapeutic avenue, based on the twin discoveries that measures of brain complexity reliably index conscious level, and that brain complexity can be increased by psychedelics.


Brain Complexity and Consciousness

Complexity is a multifaceted concept that pervades many branches of the physical and life sciences. In the neurosciences, many theoretical accounts of consciousness have related the complexity of dynamics in a neural system to the manifestation of conscious experiences (Tononi et al. 1994; Edelman 2009; Ruffini 2017; Carhart-Harris 2018). One influential formulation has been that of neural complexity, proposed by Tononi and Edelman in 1994 (Tononi et al. 1994). This concept accounts for two fundamental features of consciousness, namely differentiation, the property that any particular experience is composed of many different components and is distinguishable from any other experience, and also integration, the property that any given conscious experience involves the integration of components into a unified whole. Importantly, neural complexity could, in principle, be calculated empirically, as the average mutual information—a measure of information sharing—between each subset and the rest of a system. Tononi and Edelman posited that during conscious awareness, ‘heterogeneous patterns of short-term correlations within the corticothalamic system will result in [high neural complexity]’ (Tononi et al. 1994).

Several theories of consciousness have since been advanced that emphasize a link between different formulations of complexity within brain activity and conscious level. Alongside these theoretical developments has been the introduction of a wide range of measures of dynamical complexity. These various measures reflect the diversity of definitions of complexity in use [for review, see Arsiwalla and Verschure (2018), Seth et al. (2006); see also Bassett and Gazzaniga (2011), Cocchi et al. (2017) for broader reviews in complex systems theory] and differ in the extent to which they directly capture the properties of differentiation versus integration, as well as temporal versus spatial complexity, and in their computational feasibility for large datasets.

Despite heterogenous definitions of complexity, a prediction shared by many theories of consciousness is that complexity should be high in the normal awake state and low whenever consciousness is lost, be it through anaesthesia, non-rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, or acquired brain injury. In the past two decades, a raft of empirical support for these predictions has emerged. Massimini and colleagues have provided striking evidence in favour of the principle via use of the so-called perturbational-complexity index (PCI). PCI quantifies the complexity of electroencephalogram (EEG) responses to pulses of TMS (Casali et al. 2013). This perturbational approach has been likened to hitting a bell and measuring the complexity of the reverberations that follow. The PCI has been shown to robustly index conscious level across a range of states, including wakefulness (where the PCI is highest), sedation, non-REM sleep and anaesthesia. In patients with DoC, the PCI is lowest in VS patients, followed by patients in the MCS, then those emerged from MCS (denoted EMCS). In contrast, patients with locked-in syndrome, who have intact conscious awareness but cannot respond motorically, show PCI levels as high as healthy awake subjects (Casali et al. 2013).

At the heart of the PCI approach is quantification of the complexity of TMS-evoked EEG responses using an implementation of the Lempel-Ziv algorithm, a measure of compressibility which counts the number of unique patterns in a sequence, hence its everyday use in compressing large computer files (‘zipping’). Importantly, the Lempel-Ziv complexity (LZC) measure can also be applied to EEG recordings of spontaneous brain activity, i.e. without TMS perturbation. Whilst there are substantial differences between the spontaneous and perturbational approach, particularly that PCI evaluates only the complexity of deterministic responses of the cortex to TMS (Casali et al. 2013), the LZC of spontaneous EEG also effectively differentiates between conscious and unconscious states [including anaesthesia (Bai et al. 2015; Schartner et al. 2015) and sleep (Schartner et al. 2017b)]. In DoC, LZC-based values of spontaneous EEG reliably discriminate VS from MCS patients (Wu et al. 2011; Sitt et al. 2014) and values increase monotonically with patients’ conscious level (Sitt et al. 2014).

Our interpretation of these spontaneous EEG results is that LZC principally captures the variability or diversity of brain activity (i.e. differentiation rather than integration), and so behaves similarly to other measures of information entropy (i.e. capturing signal diversity over time). These related entropy-based metrics also appear to track conscious level [see Schartner et al. (2015), Carhart-Harris (2018) for further discussion]. Please see Schartner et al. (2015) and Mediano et al. (2019) for further discussion of these topics, and note that, for the sake of disambiguation, from here on, when we refer to ‘complexity’ we are referring to the ‘differentiation’ component in the original conception of ‘brain complexity’, i.e. the component that is measurable via LZC or a related entropy-based metric.


Psychedelics Increase Brain Complexity

Until recently, it was generally assumed that, in terms of states of consciousness, brain complexity would be maximal during normal wakefulness, since all other tested states of reduced consciousness (e.g. non-REM sleep, anaesthesia, DoC) feature correspondingly lower complexity values. It was therefore remarkable to discover that brain complexity values recorded during the psychedelic state exceed those found in normal waking consciousness. Specifically, in human subjects, increases in brain complexity (LZC) in excess of those seen in normal wakefulness were observed with psilocybin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and ketamine (at ‘psychedelic-like’ doses) (Schartner et al. 2017a). This finding has been replicated using a variety of complexity measures and measurement tools, including EEG, magnetoencephalography and functional MRI [see Carhart-Harris (2018) for review]. Furthermore, the magnitude of complexity increases correlated with the subjective intensity of the psychedelic experience (Schartner et al. 2017).


Increase Complexity, Increase Conscious Awareness?

Given that impairments in conscious awareness appear to closely relate to reductions in measures of brain complexity and psychedelics robustly increase brain complexity, could psychedelics elevate conscious awareness in patients with DoC?

Note that this hypothesis does not require that brain complexity be the cause of conscious awareness. Brain complexity per se may rather, in the terminology of Seth and Edelman (2009), be an explanatory correlate of the neural processes intimately related to conscious awareness. With this qualification in mind, a key question for our proposal is whether it is possible to increase measures of brain complexity without increasing conscious awareness. If it were possible, then this would negate our hypothesis and call into doubt the relationship between consciousness and brain complexity, at least as we define it here.

The classic psychedelic, psilocybin, is currently undergoing substantial clinical investment (Carhart-Harris and Goodwin 2017). Psilocybin is a prodrug of psilocin (4-hydroxy-dimethyltryptamine), whose principal psychoactive effects appear to be mediated by serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptor agonism. Psilocybin elevates measures of brain complexity in healthy humans (Schartner et al. 2017a; Carhart-Harris 2018) and many other lines of evidence support the idea that psilocybin could elevate conscious awareness in patients with DoC. The 5-HT2A receptors have their densest expression in the high-level cortical areas belonging to the default-mode network, which has been strongly implicated in conscious processing as well as the psychedelic state (Guldenmund et al. 2012; Beliveau et al. 2017; Carhart-Harris 2018). Most 5-HT2A receptors are expressed post-synaptically on layer 5 pyramidal neurons (Berthoux et al. 2018). These large, deep layer neurons are known to be key integration units in the cortex, and are the only cell type with dendrites spanning all cortical layers (Shai et al. 2015). In addition, presynaptic 5-HT2A receptors located at thalamo-cortical synapses have been shown to play an important role in the control of thalamo-frontal connectivity, also known to be important for consciousness (Giacino et al. 2014; Barre et al. 2016). 5-HT2A receptor agonism in animals is associated with enhanced cognitive flexibility as well as cortical neural plasticity (Frankel and Cunningham 2002; Boulougouris et al. 2008; Furr et al. 2012; Zhang and Stackman 2015; Ly et al. 2018; Olson 2018) whereas 5-HT2A receptor antagonism is associated with reduced cognitive flexibility and increased slow-wave sleep (Carhart-Harris and Nutt 2017). We recognize that one should be cautious when extrapolating from findings in animals to humans. However, there is some tentative evidence that cognitive flexibility is also enhanced in humans under psychedelics (Kuypers et al. 2016), although we would be hesitant to infer from this that psychedelics can enhance cognitive performance [see also Bayne and Carter (2018) and Carhart-Harris and Nutt (2017)].


Complexity, Conscious Content and Arousal

The standard conception of consciousness is that it encompasses two inter-related dimensions (Laureys et al. 2009; Boly et al. 2013): (i) the ‘content’ of consciousness, thought to be primarily related to cortical mechanisms, and (ii) wakefulness, or arousal, which subserves (i) and is controlled by the ascending activation systems of the brainstem and basal forebrain (i.e. the reticular activating system) (Boly et al. 2013). A key question is: how do these dimensions relate to measures of brain complexity like LZC?

Studies of impaired consciousness suggest that LZC and related measures of complexity chiefly index conscious content rather than arousal, e.g. as shown by the reductions in LZC that differentiate VS from MCS patients (Casali et al. 2013; Sitt et al. 2014) and non-REM from REM sleep (Abásolo et al. 2015). To our knowledge, there is no evidence that stimulant drugs, such as D-amphetamine or methylphenidate, which primarily increase arousal, increase brain complexity measures. In the case of psychedelics, our own experience is that arousal provides minimal explanatory value for describing the quality of the psychedelic experience. Moreover, we have argued that the evidence overwhelmingly suggests that psychedelic-related elevations in LZC or information entropy (to which LZC is closely and formally related) reflect an increased richness of conscious experience (Carhart-Harris 2018). Together, these observations suggest that targeting increases in conscious content, rather than (or perhaps in addition to) arousal, may be key to increasing conscious awareness in DoC patients.

Experiments comparing psychedelics with stimulant medications may help address the question of whether drugs presupposed (here) to increase conscious content (e.g. psilocybin) have more significant effects on brain complexity, and conscious content, than drugs that primarily promote arousal. Neurotransmitter systems implicated in the regulation and maintenance of arousal include noradrenaline, dopamine, acetylcholine, orexin, adenosine, histamine and 5-HT (Boutrel and Koob 2004; Ciurleo et al. 2013; Mura et al. 2014). Most classic stimulants act on catecholamines, and drugs such as D-amphetamine (Zhang et al. 2009), levodopa (Krimchansky et al. 2004) and modafinil (Dhamapurkar et al. 2017) have been used in DoC patients, with evidence of modest and variable clinical effects [see Ciurleo et al. (2013) and Mura et al. (2014) for review]. Our working hypothesis is that psilocybin is able to enhance conscious awareness to a greater extent than these stimulant-based alternatives.


The Relevance of a Multidimensional Conception of Consciousness

The current classification of DoC uses a taxonomy of states of consciousness ordered along a single scale, i.e. with EMCS patients having a higher level of consciousness than MCS patients who, in turn, have a higher level of consciousness than VS patients. However, recent challenges to this standard unidimensional construct of ‘levels of consciousness’ have been proposed (Bayne et al. 2016, Bayne and Carter 2018). These commentaries argue that the full range of consciousness-related capacities would be better classified using a graded, multidimensional space that captures, e.g. cognitive, sensory, affective and behavioural characteristics (Bayne et al. 2017). The same criticism has been levelled to applying the ‘levels of consciousness’ construct to all global states of consciousness—e.g. alert wakefulness, REM sleep, general anaesthesia, absence seizures and the psychedelic state—in that it fails to do justice to the evidently multifaceted nature of these states (Bayne et al. 2016; Bayne and Carter 2018). We are sympathetic to this view but also mindful of the pragmatic value of simple guiding principles in science. Thus, it remains to be seen how such a multidimensional framework, the details of which remain somewhat underspecified (Bayne et al. 2016), will align with the unidimensional complexity measures such as PCI and LZC that dominate empirical studies of states of consciousness and indeed current theories of consciousness (Baars 2005;Tononi et al. 2016; Carhart-Harris 2018). As we acknowledged earlier, we see our proposal (to explore psychedelics as a treatment in DoC) as a challenge to the unidimensional conception of conscious level as indexed by brain complexity, in that to find a dissociation between complexity increases and conscious awareness would suggest important limitations to this simplistic framework.


An Ethical Hypothesis?

We believe that the evidence presented here suggests a strong scientific case for research exploring the hypothesis that psychedelics can increase conscious awareness in patients with DoC. However, stern ethical objections could supervene to prevent it from being tested. Ethical consideration of any interventional research in patients with DoC must grapple with dual opposing imperatives: on the one hand are concerns about risks of harm to patients lacking the capacity to consent; and on the other hand, is the principle that research must be done if we are ever to progress in our ability to improve the health of these patients. We agree with others who have argued that the inability of patients to consent doesn’t make research ethically illegitimate so long as it is ethically proportionate, a judgement that hinges on the accurate assessment of risks and benefits (Giacino et al. 2014; Fins et al. 2008).

Contrary to the alarmist campaigning that so negatively affected perceptions of psychedelics during and after the 1960s, plant-based psychedelics have been used for centuries for therapeutic purposes, and a recent resumption of clinical research with them has established conditions for their safe administration. Psilocybin has a particularly favourable safety profile, with a low toxicity and addiction potential (Passie et al. 2002; Carhart-Harris and Goodwin 2017). Evidence clearly indicates that, contrary to a popular misconception, psychedelics, when used with the relevant safeguards in place, are associated with positive rather than negative long-term mental health outcomes (Carhart-Harris and Goodwin 2017). There is now converging support for the safety and tolerability of psilocybin in a variety of psychiatric disorders [e.g. see Carhart-Harris and Goodwin (2017) for review]. The psychedelic effects of psilocybin are detectable 30–60 min after oral dosing (10–25 mg), peaking at 2–3 h, and subsiding to negligible levels at least 6 h post-dose (Carhart-Harris et al. 2016). Intravenous administration accelerates the onset into the domain of seconds and shortens the duration of the experience considerably (Turton et al. 2014).

Several experimental interventions in DoC patients have been invasive by comparison with what propose here. For example, the surgical implantation of DBS electrodes has been carried out for 50 years, despite a lack of consistent evidence of benefits for improving conscious awareness (Vanhoecke and Hariz 2017). Recently, VNS implantation has been reported in a single case of a VS patient. Only modest behavioural improvements were observed when stimulation levels were titrated over a 6-month period (Corazzol et al. 2017).

A special ethical concern for neuromodulatory treatments such as DBS and VNS has been the possibility of a ‘self-awareness paradox’, whereby through an increase in conscious awareness, the patient experiences a concomitant increase in awareness of his/her clinical predicament and disability (Schiff et al. 2009). For psilocybin, treatment could conceivably also induce a transient unpleasant state of awareness, sometimes referred to colloquially (although not always accurately or helpfully) as a ‘bad trip’. It is difficult to gauge the likelihood or nature of either scenario in DoC patients given a psychedelic. A low baseline level of awareness might intuitively imply that unpleasant psychological phenomena will be both less likely and less severe than in fully aware subjects. Our experience is that such phenomena are rare in the investigational context, but more likely at higher doses and in settings lacking in psychological support.

Based on experience and accumulating evidence, there appear to be ways to mitigate the risks of difficult psychological experiences (Carhart-Harris et al. 2018). In our Phase 2 study in treatment-resistant depression, psychologically supported administration of oral psilocybin (10–25 mg) was well-tolerated by all patients, with the most common adverse events being mild transient anxiety just prior to as well as during drug onset (Carhart-Harris et al. 2016). In the case of DoC patients, one might expect anticipatory anxiety to be lower than in neurotypical individuals and the risk of anxiety could be further reduced by careful attention to the environment and ensuring familiar carers are at hand during dosing.


Future Horizons

The modest outcomes from previous interventional studies in patients with DoC should temper optimism that psilocybin could bring clinically meaningful benefits, particularly in cases of extensive neuronal loss, e.g. a sufficient degree of functional neuronal architecture may need to be in place for psychedelics to elicit a functionally meaningful effect. However, we believe that pragmatics and need, supported by sound theory and evidence, as well as proper consideration of ethics and care, should dictate how to proceed.

One potential starting point might be to test the idea using animal models, but we are doubtful of its translational value to our hypothesis. While animal studies have informed our understanding of the neural circuitry involved in information processing in general (Boly et al. 2013), it is less evident that any existing animal model of acquired brain injury (i.e. either severe traumatic brain injury or adult hypoxic ischaemic injury) holds relevance for the goal of understanding the recovery of conscious awareness in human individuals with DoC. An alternative to injury models would be to test in sedated animals whether psilocybin increases measures of brain complexity from a baseline of sedative-induced reduced complexity. Intriguingly, evidence of this kind can be found in the literature from the 1950s, with a report that LSD reverses the sedating effects of anaesthetic doses of barbiturates in cats (Apter 1958).

Given the difficulties in assessing consciousness in non-human animals, an advance on this would be to carry out the experiment in sedated healthy human volunteers, measuring complexity with scalp EEG and either LZC on spontaneous EEG signals or using PCI, accompanied by repeated behavioural measurements of consciousness, before and after psilocybin administration. Moreover, by combining spontaneous EEG/LZC and PCI measures within the same sample, one could potentially gain insight into their inter-relatedness or indeed separation and differential relevance for conscious awareness.

Whilst there are fundamental difficulties in extrapolating findings from sedated volunteers to patients with DoC, positive findings would support the case for a study of psilocybin in DoC patients. A related experiment in humans could be carried out in sleep, testing the hypothesis that psychedelics increase complexity and conscious level in non-REM sleep, perhaps by promoting REM sleep, evidence for which can also be found in the historical literature (Muzio et al. 1966; Torda 1968). Experiments comparing psilocybin with stimulant medications would help answer the question of whether drugs presupposed to increase conscious content (e.g. psilocybin) have more significant effects on brain complexity and conscious awareness than drugs that more specifically promote arousal.


Experimental Considerations

Assuming the scientific, ethical and regulatory case can be won for the testing of our hypothesis, we suggest some principles for the design of preliminary studies of psilocybin in patients with DoC, based on our experience of psychedelic experimental research.

We would advocate an incremental and adaptive approach, where the first steps would be to establish safety and tolerability and examine the signal changes of interest (i.e. changes in LZC in spontaneous EEG activity). This step-wise procedure would then be followed by a focus on optimizing the dosage parameters, and measuring and searching for the desired behavioural effects, i.e. an observable increase in conscious awareness, while maintaining good tolerability.

We expect that the patient inclusion criteria and recruitment protocol would be similar to previous early-phase pharmacology studies in this population. Exclusion criteria should include a history of psychotic disorder, as is typical with psychedelic research, and an abnormal resting electrocardiogram. Serotonergic antidepressants have been found to downregulate the 5-HT2A receptor, and attenuated responses to psychedelics have previously been reported in individuals chronically medicated with serotonergic antidepressants (Bonson et al. 1996). We would therefore exclude any patients receiving these drugs or request controlled washout from these medications, for which we have a working protocol.

As outlined above, we would first aim to test the hypothesis that psilocybin increases measures of brain complexity. To do this safely, we would use a dose-escalation design, using low doses to assess tolerability before moving to a higher, potentially therapeutic dose range. Doses in the range of 25–40 mg are used clinically and have been found to induce profound, existentially ‘transformative’ experiences in both healthy and clinical populations. The physiological safety of 30 mg/70 kg psilocybin has been well-demonstrated in healthy volunteers (Griffiths et al. 2006). We would therefore aim to reach such doses, particularly as it is possible DoC patients have reduced sensitivity to the effects of psilocybin. Although it would add complication to procedures, 5-HT2A receptor positron emission tomography could allow this assumption to be tested empirically (Kumar and Mann 2014).

We would, as a minimum, record continuous scalp EEG before, during and after dosing, and calculate LZC measures of brain complexity offline. If practicable, it would be beneficial to additionally use the PCI (i.e. EEG combined with TMS) (Casali et al. 2013). Alongside neurophysiological measures, we would also record repeated cardiorespiratory observations (heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate) and carefully observe the participant for signs of psychological distress and increased sympathetic nervous system activity. For an early-phase study, although behavioural endpoints would not be of primary interest, standardized assessments would be incorporated where this is feasible (i.e. the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised and/or Wessex Head Injury Matrix).

In subsequent analysis, it would be of interest to explore the relationship between pre- and post-dose EEG complexity and behavioural measures. Given the evidence that measures derived from EEG connectivity in patients with DoC could not only prognosticate recovery (Sitt et al. 2014; Chennu et al. 2017), but also predict response to intervention (Thibaut et al. 2018), it is possible that pre-dosage EEG measures could be used in a similar way in relation to psychedelic treatment.

We recommend detailed consideration of the choice and setup of the environment and the support provided to the patient during study sessions, although we acknowledge it will be difficult to know how a DoC patient could be prepared for the expected effects of the drug. The sessions themselves would be carried out in a familiar environment for the patient, with their normal carers present. In our study of treatment-resistant depression, psychological support was provided before, during and after each session. There is evidence to suggest that control of context is important for positive therapeutic responses (Carhart-Harris et al. 2018). The timing of dosing in relation to markers of the circadian rhythm, which is likely to influence arousal, should also be factored in (Blume et al. 2017).

In later studies of psilocybin as a treatment for patients with DoC, behavioural indices like the Coma Recovery Scale - Revised (CRS-R) must ultimately be used as the primary outcome measure. In this sense, we would wish to treat psilocybin no differently than any other experimental intervention for DoC. At present, we view brain complexity as an informative index of conscious content, but for this to be functionally relevant in the context of psychedelic interventions in DoC, it would be vital to establish that a psychedelic-induced increase in complexity ultimately translates into behavioural improvements, with the important caveat that it may be necessary in fact to test for covert awareness, i.e. identifying consciousness in the absence of any behavioural response, e.g. by using covert command-following paradigms (Owen et al. 2006).

The growing evidence for pro-plasticity effects via 5-HT2A receptor agonism suggests that later placebo-controlled studies could be designed to test whether a given dose regimen may enhance standard rehabilitative care, with the aim of augmenting its effectiveness. Here, a ‘micro-dosing’ strategy could be considered, similar to that adopted by many current studies, whereby threshold perceptible doses of psychedelics are given two to three times per week, and acute psychological ‘side effects’, such as anxiety, may be minimal. Thus, a micro-dosing protocol would put more focus on drug-assisted rehabilitative care rather than neuropharmacology alone, which would be consistent with the therapeutic model currently being employed in psychiatric contexts.

Overall, we propose an explorative, adaptive approach (within specified boundaries, and with an emphasis on caution) for this research, as so much is uncertain, including of course, positive eventualities.


Conclusion

Disorders of consciousness present unique prospects for fundamental scientific discovery and major clinical breakthroughs but also significant ethical and pragmatic challenges. The nascent renaissance in psychedelic research has shined a light on the study of consciousness, revealing anomalous positive effects on the complexity of brain activity, the low values of which have come to define states of impaired consciousness. The modern era of responsible scientific experimentation with psychedelics is yielding significant support for their safety across a range of conditions. Taken together, we call for an open-minded attitude about the possibility of exploring the potential of psychedelics to elevate conscious awareness in patients with DoC.


Authors’ Contributions

G.S.: conceptualization, drafting of and revision of the manuscript; R.L.C.-H.: conceptualization and revision of the manuscript.


Confidence modulates exploration and exploitation in value-based learning

Annika Boldt, Charles Blundell, Benedetto De Martino — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6505439, CC BY 4.0.

Uncertainty is ubiquitous in cognitive processing. In this study, we aim to investigate the ability agents possess to track and report the noise inherent in their mental operations, often in the form of confidence judgments. Here, we argue that humans can use uncertainty inherent in their representations of value beliefs to arbitrate between exploration and exploitation. Such uncertainty is reflected in explicit confidence judgments. Using a novel variant of a multi-armed bandit paradigm, we studied how beliefs were formed and how uncertainty in the encoding of these value beliefs (belief confidence) evolved over time. We found that people used uncertainty to arbitrate between exploration and exploitation, reflected in a higher tendency toward exploration when their confidence in their value representations was low. We furthermore found that value uncertainty can be linked to frameworks of metacognition in decision making in two ways. First, belief confidence drives decision confidence, i.e. people’s evaluation of their own choices. Second, individuals with higher metacognitive insight into their choices were also better at tracing the uncertainty in their environment. Together, these findings argue that such uncertainty representations play a key role in the context of cognitive control.

Keywords: uncertainty, confidence, metacognition, exploration–exploitation dilemma, value-based choice


Introduction

All cognitive computations are plagued by uncertainty (Bach and Dolan 2012). On the one hand, uncertainty can be inflicted on our cognitive systems through external sources, e.g. when we perceive noisy information in the environment. On the other hand, uncertainty can arise directly from the way the brain processes information. Recent research has supported the view of a signal-inherent representation of uncertainty, suggesting a coding scheme in which the reliability of a signal is represented together with its average strength (e.g. Ma et al. 2006; Ma and Jazayeri 2014; Van Bergen et al. 2015). Such a coding scheme allows the decision maker to more efficiently integrate new evidence by giving more weight to a reliable evidence source and discounting information from a source identified as unreliable. Such flexible weighting of evidence might take place automatically and without agents being aware of it. A wealth of empirical work has found that humans can accurately trace uncertainty and report the level of confidence in their judgments (Peirce and Jastrow 1884; Henmon 1911; Audley 1960; Shea et al. 2014; Meyniel et al. 2015b; Guggenmos et al. 2016). However, different sources of evidence are by no means to be considered equal. A recent study by Boldt et al. (2017) found that evidence reliability, operationalized as the variability of colors in a stimulus array, affected confidence more than evidence strength, operationalized as the distance of the average color from a decision boundary.

Classically, confidence has been investigated focusing on only the last stage of the decision-making process, with confidence reflecting the internal belief as to whether the chosen option was the “good” or “correct” one (e.g. Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010; Baranski and Petrusic 1994; Fleming et al. 2010). At more conceptual level, Pouget et al. (2016) proposed that we should make a distinction between decision confidence that tracks the probability of an action to be correct, and certainty that indexes the degree of uncertainty in a representation. Following this theoretical proposal in this study, we experimentally measure how these two quantities separately evolve during learning. We define “decision confidence” as the confidence that an action (e.g. choosing the most valuable bandit) is correct. We define “belief confidence” as the agent’s internal readout of the uncertainty inherent to her belief about the value of each bandit, related to the concept of “certainty” proposed in the framework by Pouget et al. (2016). More specifically, when people assign a value to an object on which they base their preferences and choices, those beliefs can vary with regard to how precise they are: on our first day at work, we might guess that we will like our new job, but several months later our certainty in that belief might have increased, resulting in a highly precise value belief representation. The study of decision confidence reaches back to the early beginnings of experimental psychology (e.g. Peirce and Jastrow 1884; Fullerton and Cattell 1892; Griffing 1895; Henmon 1911). Much of this work had focused perception and memory (Koriat et al. 1980; Nelson and Narens 1990; Gigerenzer et al. 1991; Baranski and Petrusic 1995; Hertzog and Hultsch 2000; Pleskac and Busemeyer 2010). At the theoretical level, one of the most successful framework was proposed by Douglas Vickers that defined confidence as the “balance of evidence”, the difference between two dynamic accumulators at the time of the choice (the so-called “Vickers race model”; Vickers and Packer 1982). Recently, there has been a renaissance of these seminal earlier lines of investigation and the study of confidence has been moved beyond the context of perception and memory to include (as in the present study) learning and value-based choice (e.g. De Martino et al. 2013; Koriat 2013; Lebreton et al. 2015; Meyniel et al. 2015a). Similarly, confidence in attitudes and value beliefs has been investigated both with behavioral (e.g. Brim 1955; Smith and Swinyard 1988) and recent neuroimaging studies (Lebreton et al. 2015; De Martino et al. 2017). More recently, it has been shown that it is possible to disentangle the contribution of certainty and confidence on perceptual choice at the neurocomputational level (Bang and Fleming 2018). However, how these two quantities interplay in the context of value-based learning has not been studied. This is of particular importance in this context of value-based decision making, where choices are based on internally constructed beliefs about the value of two or more alternatives. Does confidence in the value beliefs we hold have an effect on our choices? And does such belief confidence feed into our decision confidence?

Using a novel variant of a multi-armed bandit task, we show that we can reliably measure how confidence in people’s beliefs evolves over the course of learning. The aim of our study was 2-fold. First, we investigate the links between people’s belief confidence and decision confidence. The second goal of our study was to investigate how an agent uses the explicit representations of the uncertainty inherent in value representations (belief confidence) to arbitrate between different behavioral strategies. Previous research has highlighted the role of confidence signals as internal teaching signals that support cognitive control (Fernandez-Duque et al. 2000), learning (Guggenmos et al. 2016), and social interactions (Bahrami et al. 2010). Here, we are focusing on higher-order action selection, the so-called “exploration–exploitation trade-off” (Schumpeter 1934; Sutton and Barto 1998; Cohen et al. 2007; Kolling et al. 2012). Arbitrating optimally between exploration and exploitation is not trivial and different algorithms for achieving a good balance between these extreme behavioral strategies have been discussed in the machine learning literature. A principled and efficient way of arbitrating between these modes is to deploy exploration toward the options or actions regarding which the agent is more uncertain (Gittins and Jones 1974; Dayan and Sejnowski 1996). Experimental work has shown that people can implement such sophisticated strategies, which take into account the level of uncertainty in their environment (Daw et al. 2006; Frank et al. 2009), even if there are substantial inter-individual differences (Badre et al. 2012).

Here, we present the results from two studies in which participants continuously faced two lotteries (two-armed bandits), each associated with a different average outcome. The participants’ task was to maximize their earnings by choosing the most rewarding bandit. Furthermore, participants had to rate the value of the lotteries together with the confidence they held in this value belief (belief confidence), which we predicted would guide their choices. From time to time, participants were furthermore asked to freely choose between the two lotteries and to rate how accurate they regarded their choice (decision confidence). The first experiment focused on the development of preferences and confidence judgments over time. The second study focused on the decision stage and the influence of belief confidence on the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Taken together, our findings argue that the explicit representation of uncertainty expressed through confidence report plays a key role in arbitrating between complex decision strategies.


Materials and Methods


Participants

In Experiment 1, we tested 22 participants, 20 of which were female, and 3 were left-handed. Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 32 years (M = 24.0). One participant had to be excluded because during debriefing she reported that she had tracked the value of the bandits with a piece of paper. The final sample therefore included 21 participants. For Experiment 2, we tested 30 participants, 15 of whom were female, and 1 was left-handed. The participants’ ages from Experiment 2 ranged from 19 to 34 (M = 26.4). No participants were excluded in this experiment.

For both experiments, all participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision, were English-proficient, and reported that they had no psychiatric or neurological disorders or gambling addiction. All participants gave informed consent and were reimbursed for their time (£10/h). Each session lasted approximately 90 min, including instruction and debriefing. In addition, participants also received performance-dependent rewards (Experiment 1: M = £8.82; min = £8.44; max = £8.97; Experiment 2: M = £8.71; min = £8.17; max = £9.11). All procedures were approved by the local ethics committee.


Task and procedures

Experiment 1 comprised 75% rating trials and 25% choice trials. During rating trials, participants were first presented with the outcome of one of the randomly chosen arms of the bandit. They then had to rate the value belief associated with this arm (average number of points that could be won from this machine) and their confidence in this estimate. We used a 2D grid scale to collect these measurements. Value-belief judgments ranged from 0 to 100 points, belief confidence judgments from “guessing” to “very confident”. Participants were told that during rating trials, they would observe another person gamble at one of the two slot machines. We chose to use this cover story to make the task more engaging for the participants (increasing their motivation) and to stress that the two arms of the bandits were independent by comparing them to actual separated slot machines. Unbeknownst to the participant, this person chose one of the slot machines randomly with equal probability. During choice trials, participants could freely choose one of the two arms of the bandit and were then asked to rate their confidence in being correct in their choice before seeing the outcome of the trial. Decision confidence ratings were given on a scale that ranged from “guessing” to “very confident”. It should be noted that with such a scale, participants are unable to report any mistakes they detected in their own decisions. However, we decided to use this scale since it was more intuitive and we reasoned that such mistakes were likely to be rare in this experiment (participants gained a considerable amount of information from rating trials and the task was not speeded). Furthermore, we reasoned that the confidence for most choices would likely be “guessing” or higher, and we wanted to maximize resolution with which decision confidence was measured. Moreover, we wanted to match the decision confidence scale to the belief-confidence scale. Points won on those trials contributed toward the final reimbursement sum participants received after the experiment and they were instructed to carefully use the information previously gained when making their choices. Both trial types were intermixed randomly. shows an example of three trials (two rating and one choice trial).

In total, participants completed 600 trials, grouped into blocks of different lengths (20–60 trials long). Participants were thus unable to predict how many evidence samples they would be able to collect in the present block, allowing us to avoid the possibility that they would adjust their risk-taking behavior given how close they were to the end of the block (Kolling et al. 2014). For each block, beta distributions were taken to generate the rewards of the two arms of the bandit. Beta distributions can be parametrized by two positive shape parameters, α and β, which were set to [(α = 1; β = 3), (α = 2; β = 3), (α = 3; β = 3), (α = 3; β = 2), (α = 3; β = 1)] in the present study. Out of these five possible distributions, two were taken to generate the rewards in each block. These parameter ranges were chosen so that the resulting distributions had different skews away from uniform while being unimodal. The resulting samples were multiplied by 100 to achieve rewards bounded between 0 and 100 points. Prior to the experiment, participants completed three practice blocks, introducing them to choice and rating trials separately (5 trials each) and together (20 trials). Importantly, all participants completed exactly the same blocks, shuffled with regard to the order in which they appeared. The gamble outcomes that participants were presented with were thus the same for everyone, only dependent on their choices.

A key question we aimed to address with Experiment 2 was whether people would use their belief confidence to arbitrate between exploration and exploitation. While the high number of rating trials (75%) in Experiment 1 allowed us to assess whether such belief confidence was related to the learning process in a meaningful manner, this design was ill-suited to investigate how people chose between exploration and exploitation. This is primarily due to the high proportion of rating trials, in which participants observed outcomes from both arms of the bandit, which allowed them to form a good enough estimate of the value of each arm of the bandit and making exploration unnecessary. As a result, their choices should arguably mostly be exploitative. In Experiment 2, which was highly similar to Experiment 1, we therefore reversed the ratio of trial types with most trials (75%) being choice trials. However, to allow insight into the evolution of value estimation during learning, we also collected a smaller percentage (25%) of rating trials, but for the reason mentioned above in this new version we no longer let participants observe the outcomes of these trials. During rating trials, people now judged their value beliefs and belief confidence for both lotteries. Which bandit had to be rated first was randomly chosen by the computer and could not be predicted by the participants. With a considerably larger number of choice trails, we expected more exploration trials in this experiment, i.e. trials in which people would not just classify their confidence as “guessing” if asked, but instead knew that they had chosen the lower-value option. The confidence scale was thus extended to range from “low confidence” to “high confidence” for this experiment, as is common practice in perceptual decision-making studies where errors are more likely to be detected albeit usually due to a different reason (responses are speeded whereas here participants consciously chose the suboptimal decision option to gather information). If participants were highly confident that they had made the suboptimal choice, they would report that they had “low confidence” they chose the optimal choice alternative on our scale. We made sure participants understood how to use the scale by instructing them carefully and allowing them to practice using this scale before moving onto the main task. Participants were thoroughly debriefed after the experiment and invited to comment on the task and ask questions. Issues with the decision-confidence scale were not raised. Prior to Experiment 2, participants completed two practice blocks, familiarizing them first with choice trials (5 trials) and then with a combination of both choice and rating trials (12 trials).

All testing was administered using a 24-inch monitor (16:9 aspect ratio) using the MATLAB toolbox PTB3 (Kleiner et al. 2007). Responses were given with an ordinary computer mouse. Prior to the analyses reported in this study, we excluded on average 2.2% of choice trials from the analyses of Experiment 1. Those were trials in which participants responded too slowly (±3σ rule calculated separately for each participant to exclude fast lapses and trials during which participants were most likely distracted; min = 0.7%; max = 3.3%). The same held for 1.7% of choice trials in Experiment 2 (min = 0.2%; max = 2.9%). No rating trials were excluded.


Data analyses

The first set of analyses for Experiment 1 aimed to assess whether our new paradigm accurately captured belief learning over time. A second set of analyses assessed whether the uncertainty inherent in those beliefs—our concept belief confidence—constituted a meaningful judgment. We therefore attempted to link belief confidence to the more traditionally used concept of decision confidence using a linear, hierarchical regression model to predict decision confidence. We included participants’ last rated value-belief and belief-confidence ratings of both the chosen and the unchosen option as fixed effects, as well as the interaction of these estimates. Moreover, three control variables were included as fixed effects. The first variable was the objective accuracy of a trial. Decision confidence is an agent’s subjectively perceived accuracy of being correct. The objective accuracy of a trial should thus positively predict confidence, with higher confidence for correct trials. The second control variable were log-transformed RTs, given the “time heuristic” that suggests that reaction times (RTs) and confidence are negatively correlated across trials (e.g. Audley 1960; Moreno-Bote 2010; Hanks et al. 2011; Kiani et al. 2014). The third and last control variable was the number of the current trial within the block. We predicted that people’s decision confidence would increase over the course of each block, reflecting increasingly better choices. In addition to these fixed effects, the data were modeled with a random intercept and random slopes for all regressors. This regression model was fit to data from choice trials only with the R package “lme4” in combination with the R package “lmerTest.” The latter implements the Satterthwaite approximation, a formula that allows calculation of pooled degrees of freedom from variances of several independent normal distributions (Satterthwaite 1946), which in turn allows calculation of P-value estimates (for more detail see Schaalje et al. 2002). All predictors were z-transformed prior to being entered into the model to obtain standardized regression coefficients.

The key goal of Experiment 2 was to test for uncertainty-driven exploration. Here, we define exploration as choice trials in which participants chose the option they might reasonably believe to be lower-valued. Since value ratings for the individual arms of the bandit were only collected during rating trials, we extrapolated the current value rating for choice trials using the measurement taken at the most recent rating trial. An exploration trial is then defined as a trial in which the participant choses the arm of the bandit they rated as yielding lower rewards, whereas an exploitation trial is defined as choosing the option rated to yield higher values. We then fitted a logistic, hierarchical regression model to the choice-trial data of Experiment 2 to test for uncertainty-driven exploration. The dependent, binary variable expressed whether or not on the current trial people chose the choice option that they had previously rated as having a lower-value compared to the other option—our new operationalization of exploration. We included participants’ last rated belief confidence of both the higher- and the lower-value choice option as fixed effects, as well as the interaction of these estimates. Moreover, the difference in value (DV) for the choice options (high minus low) was included as a fixed effect. In addition to these fixed effects, the data were modeled with a random intercept and random slopes for all regressors. This regression model was again fit to data from choice trials only, using the R package “lme4”. All predictors were z-transformed prior to being entered into the model to obtain standardized regression coefficients.

In Experiment 2, we furthermore attempted to link inter-individual differences in people’s ability to trace uncertainty to their metacognitive efficiency. We obtained metacognitive efficiency measures, M-ratio, by fitting second-order signal-detection theory models to participants’ decision confidence data (Maniscalco and Lau 2012; Fleming and Lau 2014) using the MATLAB package HMeta-d (Fleming 2017). This approach automatically adjusts for differences in first-order performance. We furthermore fitted hierarchical, linear regression models that predicted belief confidence from the variance and mean of past outcomes, the current trial within the block, as well as the arm of the bandit. The standardized beta weights of the influence of the variance of past outcomes on belief confidence were used as an indicator for the extent to which people were capable of tracking uncertainty.

For the sake of simplicity, for all regression approaches in this study we report coefficients from the model that fitted the data best. However, a comprehensive list of models of varying degrees of complexity (10, 5, or 6 models, respectively) and a formal model comparison based on Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) scores is included the and.


Results


Experiment 1


Participants formed value beliefs over time

In Experiment 1, we investigated how value belief and belief confidence rating evolved over time. We assumed that participants would adjust their value-belief estimates with each sample of evidence, presumably getting closer to the true value over time. At the same time, the level of confidence in these value estimates should increase in the course of learning. We found support for both of these predictions and address each in turn here. First, as expected we found that participants’ value estimates increased in accuracy over time. Value estimation accuracy was on average 11 points off during the first half of the blocks, and only 8 points off during the second half. This difference in estimation errors was reliable, t(20) = 9.7, P < 0.001. This overall pattern of improvement can furthermore be seen in, in which the gray hairline arrows are smaller for later trials in the example block (darker colors) compared to earlier trials (lighter colors). This figure furthermore shows that people perceived the arms of the bandit as more similar at the beginning of the block (the two traces are closer together) compared to the end of the block.

Second, participants grew monotonically more confident in their value estimates (belief confidence) over the course of learning, Mearly = 0.36 vs. Mlate = 0.58, t(20) = 9.4, P < 0.001. This increase in confidence is furthermore reflected in the traces in, where later judgments (darker colors) lie closer toward the right end of the x-axis. However, the example traces also show that belief confidence could sometimes suddenly decrease over the course of a block, as reflected, for instance, in the two data points highlighted by asterisks in the darker colored asterisk lies further to the left compared to the lighter colored asterisk. Presumably, this happens whenever the newly sampled evidence leads to a larger update in value belief. Indeed, the larger the absolute difference between the currently observed outcome and the previously estimated value for the respective arm of the bandit, the larger the decrease in belief confidence, as reflected in individual correlations that were negative for 20 out of 21 participants, rs ≥ −0.46 and rs ≤ −0.01, and reliable for 16 out of 21 participants (Ps < 0.01). Interestingly, such behavior goes against how a Bayesian agent would integrate information: every new piece of evidence, no matter how “far” it lies from the prior should lead to a reduction of the variance of the posterior (spread of the distributions in). Our data therefore suggest that Bayesian integration might not be a suitable model for belief confidence. We explore this point in more detail in the, where a type of Bayesian filter (a particle filter) is directly compared to three reinforcement learning (RL) models to model people’s value learning and trial-by-trial updating of belief confidence.

Taken together, these findings suggest the paradigm used here is well suited to study the development of value beliefs and belief confidence over time: participants’ value estimates increased in accuracy and this was reflected in increases in belief confidence.


Linking belief confidence to decision confidence

Having established that our paradigm reflects meaningful changes in beliefs over time and uncertainty inherent in those beliefs, we then aimed to investigate the link between people’s (value) belief confidence—the key concept of interest in this study—and decision confidence. We have previously shown that decision confidence is a function of the DV (De Martino et al. 2013). The schematic diagram in outlines this finding: two noisy value beliefs are represented as distributions, with their distance reflecting the DV. In the present study, we furthermore propose that belief confidence affects decision confidence. Belief confidence is reflected in the spreads of the two belief distributions; the narrower these distributions are, the more confident people judged their decisions. We therefore fitted a hierarchical, linear regression model to predict people’s decision confidence from their value-belief and belief-confidence ratings of both the chosen and unchosen arm of the bandit, the interaction of these estimates, and three control variables: the objective accuracy of a trial and log-transformed RTs. The standardized regression coefficients for the fixed effects are presented in. We chose to present the best-fitting model here based on BIC scores (BIC = 5293.9). However, a detailed model comparison approach which included a range of models, both more parsimonious and more complex, is included in the. Some of these alternative models included the position of the trial within a block as a regressor (log-transformed).

As reported by De Martino et al. (2013), a larger DV was associated with higher decision confidence, as reflected in the significantly positive and negative regression weights for the value of the chosen, β = 0.30, P < 0.001, and unchosen option, β = −0.18, P < 0.001, respectively. These predictors furthermore showed a small but reliable interaction effect, β = 0.04, P < 0.05. depicts the influence of both value-belief regressors on decision confidence as a 2D grid with lighter colors reflecting higher simulated decision confidence.

Critically, being confident in their value estimates also made people more confident in their decisions, both for the chosen, β = 0.33, P < 0.001, and also the unchosen choice option, β = 0.17, P < 0.001. The best-fitting model did not include an interaction between these two predictors. However, the prediction pattern formed by these two belief-confidence regressors is shown in.

Moreover, two control variables were included in these regression models. First, the objective accuracy of the current trial was a binary variable that affected decision confidence positively, β = 0.07, P < 0.001, as predicted. In other words, if participants picked the objectively higher-value option, they tended to be more confident in their choices. Second, the faster a decision, the higher people’s subjectively judged decision confidence, β = −0.15, P < 0.001.

Taken together, the results of Experiment 1 suggest that our experimental setup allowed us to track the evolution of value beliefs over the course of learning and that belief confidence reflects meaningful insight into such learning. We moreover found that how certain people are in their value beliefs affected their decision confidence, in support of our first hypothesis.


Experiment 2

Having established with the findings from Experiment 1 that belief confidence constitutes a meaningful measure of value uncertainty, and having linked belief confidence with decision confidence, we then addressed another key question of this study: would people use their belief confidence to arbitrate between exploration and exploitation? In Experiment 2, the proportions of choice (75%) and rating trials (25%) were reversed to allow for more exploration, whereas in Experiment 1, people often gained a sufficient amount of information from the lower-value bandit simply through observing outcomes during the rating trials, thereby lowering the need for active exploration of that decision option during choice trials. Indeed, this new design largely increased the number of trials in which the participants chose the lower-value option: participants on average chose the subjectively perceived lower-value option on 22.1% of all trials as opposed to only 13.3% of all trials for the previous experiment—supporting the view that they were exploring more.


Participants have meaningful insight into their gambling behavior

We first assessed whether decision confidence allowed any meaningful insight into people’s choice patterns, having now collected a considerably larger number of such choice trials. People made decisions on average 822 ms after the onset of the trial and chose the higher-value bandit—given previously observed outcomes—in on average 81.6% of all choice trials (this percentage is calculated based on objective value outcomes and not perceived value, as in the previous analysis). Overall, people showed good resolution in their decision-confidence judgments, i.e. their decision confidence varied with both the percentage of trials on which the higher-value option was chosen, as well as average reward points. Indeed, error rates (defined as the proportion of trials on which participants chose the lower-value option) differed reliably across confidence bins, F(1.7, 49.3) = 107.9, P < 0.001, η2p = 0.79, with a reliable linear trend, F(1, 29) = 140.9, P < 0.001, η2p = 0.83, see. The same held for average rewards across decision-confidence quintiles, F(4, 116) = 117.0, P < 0.001, η2p = 0.80, again with a reliable linear trend, F(1, 29) = 301.4, P < 0.001, η2p = 0.91, see.


Confidence-guided exploration

To test whether participants arbitrate between exploration and exploitation based on their belief confidence, we fitted a hierarchical, logistic regression model to participants’ choice-trial data. The model predicts the probability of choosing the lower-value option (exploration) from the belief confidence of the higher-value option, as well as the unsigned DV as a control variable, which we defined as abs(VL − VR). This model was identified as the best-fitting model from a formal model comparison approach based on BIC scores, which we report in the along with several other models. The furthermore include the results from a model that also includes belief confidence of the lower-value option as a (non-significant) predictor as well as a (significant) interaction between the two belief confidences. However, this slightly more complex model did not fit the data as well (BIC = 11 114.2) as the model presented here (BIC = 10 923.9).

Critically, belief confidence of the higher-value option significantly predicted exploration, β = −0.59, P < 0.001. This effect was negative, expressing that participants tended to explore more if their belief confidence was low, consistent with our prediction. The unsigned DV furthermore modulated choice significantly, β = −1.02, P < 0.001, and negatively: the larger the absolute DV, the less participants chose to explore the lower-value option as arguably the overlap of the two value representations was small. presents how the DV and belief confidence of the higher-value choice option relate to exploration, with brighter colors reflecting higher proportions of exploratory choices. DV and confidence in the higher-value option did also interact reliably, β = −0.28, P < 0.001. The standardized, fixed-effect regression coefficients are furthermore presented in. Together, these findings suggest that if the value representation of the preferred option is noisier, people tend to explore the inferior choice option more, compared to when it is precise. We thus conclude that belief uncertainty—as measured through belief confidence judgments—guides the trade-off between exploration and exploitation.


Inter-individual differences in participants’ capability to track uncertainty

The increase in choice trials allowed us to obtain reliable measures of people’s metacognitive efficiency—the accuracy of their decision confidence judgments. The final question, which we aimed to address with our study was whether the degree by which people can accurately harness the level of uncertainty in their beliefs through confidence relates to their metacognitive efficiency, thus explaining some of the inter-individual variability reported in the literature.

To estimate the former, we first fitted a hierarchical, linear regression model simultaneously to all participants’ rating-trial data to assess the degree to which belief-confidence estimates were driven by the variability of the past, observed outcomes or other control variables [mean of the past outcomes, the current trial within the block (log-transformed), and the arm of the bandit]. Included in this model were two-way interactions between all variables except for the arm of the bandit, as well as the respective three-way interaction. A formal model comparison based on the BIC score (BIC = 17 231.2), this model fitted the data best. A range of other models are presented in the.

The standardized regression weights for the fixed effects of all predictors are presented in. This simple, normative model of how beliefs should be formed over time constitutes an ideal-observer model that can then be used to predict empirical responses. The influence of outcome variance on belief confidence was negative and reliably different from zero, βsig = −0.37, P < 0.001. The more variable past outcomes were, the less confident people became, consistent with our simple ideal-observer model. The mean of past outcomes had a weak positive, but also reliable influence on belief confidence, βmu = 0.06, P = 0.04, the higher the outcomes people had observed for this arm, the more confident they judged their beliefs. The other two control variables, the current trial within the block (log-transformed), βlogtrial = −0.05, P = 0.46, and the arm of the bandit, βtrial = −0.02, P = 0.24, did not reliably predict belief confidence. Out of all two-way interactions, only the interaction between the standard deviation and mean of all previously observed outcomes was reliable, βsig × mu = −0.14, P < 0.001, as was the three-way interaction between standard deviation and mean of all previously observed outcomes and the current trial, βsig × mu × logtrial = −0.04, P < 0.01. None of the other interactions were reliable, abs(βs) < 0.014, Ps > 0.54. Taken together, these findings suggest that people updated belief confidence similar to the simple ideal-observer model.

We then correlated the individual beta weights for the influence of outcome variance, βsig, with people’s metacognitive efficiency, log(M-ratio). We found that participants who were driven more in their belief-confidence estimates by the normative, ideal-observer belief confidence (outcome variance; i.e. larger negative regression weight for beta outcome σ) were more metacognitively efficient (higher metacognitive efficiency score), r = −0.37, P < 0.05. In other words, people who were better at tracing the uncertainty present in the environment were better at distinguishing their own “good” and “bad” decisions, further linking the concepts of belief confidence and decision confidence. There was no such relationship between the beta weights for the influence of outcome mean, βmu, and metacognitive efficiency, r = 0.02, P = 0.94.

The results of Experiment 2 suggest that people use their belief confidence to arbitrate between two extreme modes of behavior, exploration and exploitation. We moreover found that people whose belief confidence matched that of an ideal observer closer also showed better insight into their own decisions, thus suggesting a link between uncertainty in the belief representations (belief confidence) and decision confidence, further shedding light on the internal signals and cues that give rise to confidence in a value-based decision-making context.


Discussion

The present study used a novel variant of a bandit paradigm that allowed tracking of belief formation over time. We found that noisy value representations—especially regarding the higher-value option—led participants to explore more. Such uncertainty-guided exploration matches and further extends previous findings of uncertainty-driven exploitation (e.g. Frank et al. 2009; Badre et al. 2012). The key difference, however, was that we have demonstrated that it is possible to directly measure the uncertainty that serves as a cue to action selection using confidence judgments. Previous studies, on the other hand, have focused entirely on computational estimates of uncertainty. Our findings are further strengthened by our explicit measure of exploration. In previous studies, exploitation has commonly been operationalized as the act of choosing the same option compared to the previous trial—whether this is referring to discrete choice options (e.g., Kolling et al. 2012) or different decision strategies that are combined continuously (e.g. Frank et al. 2009). However, such an operationalization is unable to capture whether the agent chooses the option that he perceives to currently yield the best outcomes (exploitation) or not (exploration). Here, we defined as “exploration” a situation in which people choose an option they explicitly rated as inferior.

Confidence-guided exploration takes its place alongside a range of other findings that suggest that confidence forms a cornerstone of cognitive control (for reviews see Nelson and Narens 1990; Fernandez-Duque et al. 2000; Yeung and Summerfield 2012, Shea et al. 2014). For instance, research on metacognition in memory suggests that people use their internal, metacognitive signals to optimize learning, focusing on items they feel least confident about (Nelson and Leonesio 1988), even when these metacognitive judgments were objectively wrong (Metcalfe and Finn 2008; Hanczakowski et al. 2014). Similarly, findings from the error-monitoring literature suggest that people commonly slow down after committing an error (Rabbitt 1966), suggesting that they adopt a more accuracy-focused response regime to avoid further mistakes (Dutilh et al. 2012). Relatedly, confidence has been shown to serve as an internal teaching signal to support learning (Guggenmos et al. 2016) and metacognition has been proposed as a mechanism to guide people’s decisions to cognitively offload by setting reminders to avoid memory failures (Risko and Gilbert 2016). The notion that representations of uncertainty can be used by the brain to optimize behavior therefore extends and augments previous findings and discussions on metacognition.

We found that belief confidence predicted exploration in a linear way: the more uncertain people judged their value beliefs, the more likely they were to explore respective choice options. This finding is seemingly at odds with studies and theories that suggest confidence is related to curiosity in an inverse u-form shape (Kang et al. 2009; for a review of these findings see Butlin 2010). However, it should be noted that these studies used a full confidence scale, i.e. a scale that reaches from 0% confidence (certainly wrong) over 50% confidence (guessing) to 100% confidence (certainly correct). In our study, belief confidence ratings were given on a scale ranging from 50% to 100% confidence. We chose this scale because we collected value belief and belief confidence ratings concurrently and therefore did not expect any error detection. These findings can thus be reconciled considering only the curiosity ratings for the upper half of the scale used in Kang et al. (2009).

Our study furthermore linked the concept of (value) belief confidence, to the more traditionally studied concept of decision confidence. We found that participants with more accurate insight into their decisions tended to be driven more by the variability in their experienced outcomes in their belief confidence. Relatedly, we found that belief confidence had an effect on how some people judged their choices. Critically, this was found not only for the chosen option (being certain regarding the higher value of the option participants selected increased their decision confidence) but also for the belief confidence of the unchosen option: being certain about the value of the decision alternative people chose to forgo also increased their decision confidence. This finding fits and extends previous studies that reported that humans are capable of tracking counterfactual choice options (Boorman et al. 2011; see also Domenech and Koechlin 2015).

The finding that the belief confidence of both choice options affects decision confidence furthermore extends and links to previous results from our lab. In an initial study, we found that confidence in a value-based binary decisions (i.e. decision confidence in the current framework) was associated with activity in both the ventro-medial and the rostro-lateral prefrontal cortex (vmPFC and rlPFC) (De Martino et al. 2013) in which the former tracked both DV estimates and confidence and the latter only confidence. In a subsequent study (De Martino et al. 2017), instead of using binary choice we elicited confidence into value estimates (i.e. belief confidence according to the taxonomy used here) we found again an involvement of vmPFC (expanding into dorso-medial prefrontal cortex, dmPFC, according to a functional gradient) but no confidence signal in rlPFC. In light of the results presented here, we are tempted to suggest a possible dissociation of roles these two regions might play in the readout of uncertainty. In the choice study (De Martino et al. 2013), participants repeatedly chose between different snack items presented on screen, reporting their decision confidence with every choice, whereas value beliefs and belief confidence were not measured. Given the tight link between belief confidence in the chosen item and decision confidence that we showed in the present study, it is possible that the vmPFC activations that were observed in the binary choice study (De Martino et al. 2013) are mainly reflections of belief confidence (i.e. the uncertainty into the value estimation). This possibility is consistent with a subsequent finding in which belief confidence was directly measured in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study and in which activity in vmPFC was identified (De Martino et al. 2017; but see also Lebreton et al. 2015). An intriguing possibility is that rlPFC is involved only in decision confidence (or the subsequent use of such for the purpose of cognitive control; cf. Badre et al. 2012), i.e. when participants are requested to explicitly report the probability of an action to be correct. This matches the notion that the rlPFC is involved in the readout of metacognitive reports (usually measured in choice and not in estimation tasks), and it is supported by findings that show that coupling strength of the rlPFC with vmPFC is predictive of how efficiently uncertainty is read out for the metacognitive report (De Martino et al. 2013), as well as that gray matter volume in this area correlates with participants’ metacognitive accuracy (Fleming et al. 2010; for a review of the role of rlPFC in metacognition also see Fleming and Dolan 2012). This would suggest that low-level representations of uncertainty (measured by belief confidence here) are inherent to the computation performed by the cortical regions such as vmPFC for value beliefs (De Martino et al. 2013) or visual cortex for perceptual estimation (Fleming et al. 2012). However, following a choice, the uncertainty inherent in these low-level representations, together with uncertainty arising during the decision process such as response speed (Kiani et al. 2014) or familiarity and fluency (Koriat 1997) can in turn inform metacognitive reports that are instantiated in rlPFC.

In the present study, we proposed that belief confidence arises from the belief updating process, both of which we measured using explicit ratings. Belief confidence is likely to reflect both the stochasticity inherent in the lotteries (risk), as well as epistemic uncertainty, which decreases gradually through learning. Relatedly, a recent study by Meyniel et al. (2015a) proposed a learning paradigm that allows studying the development of confidence over time: participants were presented with a sequence of one of two possible stimuli. From time to time, participants had to estimate the probability that they were currently in a hidden state, which generated these stimuli with different probabilities and their confidence regarding the correctness of their probability judgment. Meyniel et al. (2015a) found that people were able to trace the evolving transition probabilities and that their confidence judgments reflected the uncertainty inherent in such a learning process, stemming from both the inherent stochasticity of the task, insufficient exposure, as well as the sudden transitions of states that happened throughout the experiment, bearing some similarities to the concepts of expected and unexpected uncertainty (e.g. Yu and Dayan 2005).

Furthermore, Bang and Fleming (2018) recently published a relevant fMRI study on the link between evidence certainty and decision confidence, that was similarly inspired by the conceptual proposal of Pouget et al. (2016). The authors used a random dot motion task and manipulated dot coherence to affect the reliability of the sensory evidence. Importantly, they found that certainty was encoded in posterior parietal regions, whereas decision confidence was encoded in medial prefrontal regions. The finding that different brain regions reflect these different representations of uncertainty are further support for the notion that the brain represents a multifaceted confidence system, the architecture of which we are only just beginning to grasp. The work presented here provides a suitable setup to study these two quantities in the context of value-based learning and furthermore demonstrates how these quantities influence learning. Future research might be able to capitalize on our paradigm to investigate whether belief confidence and decision confidence in the context of value-based decision making show a similar double dissociation at the neural level.

To conclude, our results provide a novel account of how uncertainty in value-belief judgments is constructed over time, and how people arbitrate between exploration and exploitation, with an uncertainty bonus biasing people toward exploration for the purpose of further information seeking (e.g. Daw et al. 2006; Frank et al. 2009). We suggest that our results carry implications for how the precision in the value representation for the chosen and unchosen option feeds into decision confidence, suggesting that uncertainty in the value-belief representations (belief uncertainty) also affects how confident people judge their choices, with higher decision confidence if decisions were based on precisely represented values of both the chosen and unchosen choice option. We showed that people who were better capable of tracing the uncertainty inherent in the environment also possessed higher metacognitive insight into their decisions. Our results therefore argue for a complementary role of decision and belief confidence judgments.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The data and code are available for download under https://github.com/BDMLab/Boldt_et_al_2019.


Long-term dynamics of mind wandering: ultradian rhythms in thought generation

Chie Nakatani, Benjamin Ganschow, Cees van Leeuwen — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6555903, CC BY 4.0.

Using the method of experience sampling, we studied the fluctuations in thought generation and cognitive control strength during the wakeful hours of the day, centered around episodes of mind wandering. Thought generation, measured in terms of the number of thoughts that concurrently occupy the mind at sampling time, goes through regular 4–6 h cycles, suggesting the mind operates with an alternation of focused and multitasking modes. Cognitive control strength rises and falls in relative coordination with thought generation, implying that both are occasionally misaligned. This happens, in particular, when cognitive control suddenly drops after having been keeping up with a cycle of thought generation. When this drop occurs while the thought generation cycle is still up, mind wandering appears. As cognitive control quickly resumes before returning to intermediate values, the thought generation cycle begins to fall again, and the mind wandering episode comes to an end. Implications regarding the role of long-term regulation in mind-wandering processes are discussed.


Introduction

Since Thomas Hobbes coined the term “train of thought,” spontaneous mental activity is commonly understood as a sequential process, in which one idea leads to another. Often, however, we have more than one thought on our mind. Most likely, our thought generation rate varies over time and we dwell on certain thoughts longer than on others. The net effect is that the number of thoughts that occupy our mind varies. We are aware of this, when at times we casually say things like: “I have so many things to think about” or, at others: “I was so much focused on that single thought.” While people are known to express such first-person, metacognitive reports spontaneously, they could also be prompted to do so, for instance by asking them to report: “how many things are on your mind right now?” Doing so repeatedly with certain intervals may give us useful information about systematic fluctuations in the thought process.

Besides in number, there are also fluctuations in the extent the thoughts on our mind cohere. Sometimes, thoughts are centered on a single problem; sometimes our mind wanders around topics seemingly unrelated to each other. Cast in terms of loss of sustained attention to a task, the itinerant mind has extensively been studied in the vigilance literature (e.g. Mackworth 1964; Davies and Parasuraman 1982; Oken et al. 2006; Thomson et al. 2015; Bermudez et al. 2016). In this literature, mind wandering starts unintentionally. As the task requires sustained focus, effort is made to bring the task-irrelevant thought down and refocus on the task (Smallwood and Schooler 2006). This brings an end to, what the authors call, a mind-wandering cycle.

Mind wandering is not necessarily destructive; it shares with creative processes the feature of unchecked productive thinking (Ellamil et al. 2012). Positive effects may help explain, at least, in part, why our mind wanders rather frequently. The incidence of mind wandering in experimental settings varies from approximately 15% of the time during verbal fluency and memory encoding tasks (Smallwood et al. 2003), up to nearly 50% of the time during a simple signal detection task (Antrobus 1968; Giambra 1995; Smallwood et al. 2004), i.e. mind wandering is roughly inversely proportionally to task load. Outside of the laboratory, reported incidence rates of mind wandering may occupy 30–40% of thought processes in daily life (Klinger and Cox 1987). These incidence rates suggest that might wandering might have some restorative or homeostatic function, such as in maintaining the integrity of our self-concept (Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna 2013).

Spontaneous (self-generated) and unconstrained (stimulus or task-independent) thought also plays a prominent role in daydreaming (Singer 1966; Antrobus 1968; Klinger and Cox 1987; Klinger 2009; Ellamil et al. 2012; Perkins et al. 2015). We may consider mind wandering and daydreaming as belonging to a continuous spectrum of spontaneous thought processes (Voss and Voss 2014; Christoff et al. 2016). This spectrum, according to Christoff et al. (2016) consists of two dimensions. One is strength of “deliberate constraints” implemented though cognitive control. A variety of thought processes can be ordered along this dimension, successively: dreaming, mind wandering, creative thinking, and goal-directed thought. The mind wandering cycle as envisaged by Smallwood and Schooler (2006)—being focused on a task, drifting away from the focus, followed by reflexive awareness of mind wandering and resumption of focused thought—can be described along this dimension as temporary relaxation of deliberate constraints.

The other dimension is strength of “automatic constraints” which involves mechanisms such as saliency that operate outside of cognitive control. In particular, the number of thoughts changes along this dimension. When these constraints are strong, only a small number of distinct thoughts will be salient enough to occupy the mind. In the extreme case, the mind will be in a state of rumination or obsessive thought. As the constraints relax, the number of distinct thought increases, allowing creative thinking, mind wandering, or day dreaming to arise. We will refrain from using the term “automatic,” and adopt “number of thoughts” as our preferred label for this second dimension.


Trajectories of spontaneous thought processes

The two dimensions as considered by Christoff et al. (2016) constitute a space in which a point, depending on its location with respect to the axes, may specify an individual’s state of mind at a certain time. Changes in mental state over time could be described as trajectories in this space. Various trajectories could, in principle, lead to mind wandering; they are not necessarily confined to a fixed pattern. For instance, a specific task in daily life can set off mind wandering if the number of thoughts increases while the focus on the task decreases. This implies a more or less straight trajectory from the lower-right region of the space of to the upper-left, where fully evolved mind-wandering states occur. Alternatively, the mind-wandering state may be reached, for instance, from the upper-right region of the space, where the control is applied over many thoughts, e.g. in multitasking; or even, in principle, via the lower-left region, where both the control and number of thoughts are low, i.e. rumination or obsessive thinking. Possible trajectories leading to mind wandering vary to the extent in which reduction of control leads or lags the increase in number of thoughts.

Observing trajectories like in will allow us to raise simple yet unanswered questions about the time course, intra- and inter-individual consistency and variation of the processes leading to mind wandering. To observe these trajectories, the number of thoughts and the level of deliberate constraints need to be measured repeatedly over time. This could be done, in principle, in various temporal resolutions and time scales. In the laboratory, mind-wandering-related processes have frequently been studied using magneto– or electro–encephalogram (MEG or EEG) of which time scale is in the range of milliseconds, and using behavioral responses and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of which time scale is in the range of seconds (Baird et al. 2014; Hellyer et al. 2014; Ibáñez-Molina and Iglesias-Parro 2014; Christoff et al. 2016; Andrews-Hanna et al. 2018). Mind-wandering processes on the scale of minutes and hours have been studied using online questionnaire sessions (Kane et al. 2007). Kane et al. (2017) sent questionnaires to participants via a mobile digital device eight times/day for 7 days, to sample the probability and context of mind wandering. The results were correlated with laboratory cognitive measures of executive functions and personality traits. Unfortunately, their study did not report fluctuations in mind-wandering frequency across the sampling period. No measure was taken of numbers of thoughts, preventing the reconstruction of mind-wandering trajectories in the requisite 2D space. We aim to reconstruct the typical trajectory of the mind-wandering process, based on time series of subjective reports. We collected these reports using an experience sampling method, by sending probes to participants’ smartphones during the wakeful hours of the day. Accordingly, the time scale for the trajectory is in the order of hours.


Methods


Participants

A total of 32 participants from the psychology program at KU Leuven (69% female, mean age = 19) participated to the study for course credits. None of them reported existing physical and mental health issues.


Research ethics

The Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences at KU Leuven approved the current study. The study was preregistered on the Open Science Framework (OSF) as “The Mind Wandering Project” on 30 January 2017 (https://osf.io/vruut/? view_only=07156c32873a4318bf90ec4b9d1c15ab). Data are stored in the OSF site and available on request.


Probe design

Participants received a short message on their own smartphone. The message included a link to a probe. The probe consisted of a visual task and a questionnaire. Both the task and questionnaire were emulated on participants’ own smartphone. The task involved rating of scene closeness which, as explained below, is used to estimate strength of deliberate constraints. The questionnaire asked participants to briefly report the number and the type of content of their thoughts.


Scene closeness rating

To be suitable for experience sampling, a test of cognitive control needs to be simple and one-shot. This means, we cannot use standard tests like the Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART). Such a task would have required key presses to “go” stimuli, e.g. a digit “3,” as opposed to other digits. “Go” responses to “no-go” stimuli in this task indicate failure of sustained task-related attention (Robertson et al. 1997; Manly et al. 1999). To obtain a number of error trials sufficient for evaluating sustained attention, the task has to be continued for at least 8 min (Nuechterlein et al. 1983; Temple et al. 2000). This renders it unsuitable for our purpose.

We therefore developed a single-trial test of cognitive control. In this test, the same scene is presented on a smartphone display twice, both times exactly the same size. Participants are not informed of the size identity, and are asked to report how much closer/farther the second presentation appeared relative to the first one, using a five-point scale. Despite the identity, participants are expected not always to give “same” responses, i.e. the midpoint of the five-point scale (approximately 25% non-same responses were given in the current study and a follow-up in, Part 1). Non-same responses are taken to indicate strong cognitive control, imposing a top-down bias to overrule the default “same” response. Nondefault responses were therefore taken to reflect deliberate constraints.

Stimuli were realistic color images of scenes, collected from the public domain image repository (https://pixabay.com). Seventy-one scene images with one main object, e.g. a red robin on a tree branch, were chosen for 71 times of probing. The images were selected by two of the authors independently (B.G., male and C.N., female) for good visibility under various viewing conditions during real-life sampling and for similar levels of salience. Images approved by both judges were selected for inclusion. The images were formatted to 700 × 700 pixels and collated to GIF animation. The sequence of events is illustrated in. On the smartphone display, a fixation/mask was presented for 2000 ms, followed by a scene of a single object and background which is displayed for 250 ms. The fixation display masks the image for 250 ms. Then the scene was presented for the second time. Presentation timing error was 1.4 ms for 250 ms in a benchmark test using two types of smart phones which are popular to the local community.

The scene closeness rating task was given at the beginning of the probe. Participants were instructed not to change viewing distance during the test and to judge whether the second time, the object is “much farther away,” “a little farther away,” “the same,” “a little closer up,” or “much closer up,” compared with the first presentation. After the response, participants were asked to report any problems that may have occurred to the stimulus presentation (e.g. noticeable slowing down of image display rate or a missing second image).

Although the task closely resembles the Boundary Extension test (Mullally et al. 2012; Mullally and Maguire 2014), its focus and use of data differs quite markedly from the current one. An analysis centered on non-same closeness ratings is applied for the first time in the current study. Therefore, we assessed its reliability in a separate study using 20 different participants, in an effort to replicate the main results. Details are reported in, Part 1: A reliability study for scene closeness rating test.


Questionnaire

Number of thoughts in mind. The scene closeness rating task is followed immediately by the questionnaire. The first question asks to report the number of thoughts the participant had in mind just before arrival of the probe. Participants were instructed to report the number of topics rather than individual content items. This was illustrated with examples as follows: when thinking of your lunch while attending a lecture, the report should be one (lunch) or two (lunch and lecture), rather than five (sandwich, apple, cookies, friends, and lecture slides). Our volunteers were able to report such numbers without confusion. The number is reported by selecting the response alternative from a dropdown menu, running from 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, to 10+ (Question 1).

State of mind and qualitative aspects of mind wandering. In the rest of the questionnaire, participants reported their mental state. First, they report if just before the arrival of the probe they were focused or mind wandering. In case of mind wandering, they also reported if there was a task which they were currently supposed to be focused on (Question 2). Questions 3–14 ask participants to categorize various qualitative aspects of their mind-wandering state: duration, vividness, enjoyableness, feasibility, tense (past-future), frequency, occupancy, topic, and the person(s) involved, current wakefulness, and mood. Finally, participants were asked to report whether they had consumed any alcohol or drugs (Question 15).


Procedure

After obtaining informed consent, the mobile phone of the participant was checked to assure its data transfer speed and image presentation ability are compatible with the probe, which they all were. An instruction for the probe session was given to the participants. Participants chose their preferred starting date of 2-week period, and their daily probing schedule from four alternatives: 9:00–21:00, 10:00–22:00, 11:00–23:00, or 12:00–24:00. Once the data sampling started, the probe was sent five times a day for 14 days including weekends. On the last day of the sampling period, an extra probe was sent. Thus, a total number of 71 probes were reached. The probes were sent in pseudo-random time intervals of between 10 and 144 min. The schedule of probing was managed by the Google programming script application GmailDelaySend version 8.0 (Kuzman 2016). The scene closeness rating test and questionnaire were both implemented in Google Forms (Questionnaire accessible at: https://goo.gl/forms/BIJpUNcfbAnwY7aH3).

Participants received a short message for the probe on their mobile device. Each message contains a link to the online forms. Participants tap the link to report their mental state just before the arrival of the notice. They can also decline the probe when necessary, by selecting ‘No, I do not have time now.’ Responses were collected and marked with a time stamp at the Google online forms account.


Data analysis

All statistical analyses were conducted using the R package (R Core Team 2017) and in-house Python scripts. In order to assess experiential aspects of mind wandering (i.e. relating to possible differences between mind wandering from a task and without a task), responses to the questionnaire items from (except for Question 1 asking for the number of thoughts) were analyzed using ANOVA, paired t-test and chi-squared tests. This analysis corresponds to Results, Questionnaire summary and and.

Prior to trajectory reconstruction, numbers of thoughts (NoTs, Question 1) and scene closeness ratings obtained from the probes were grouped, depending on the answer to Question 2, into task-focused and mind-wandering states. The NoTs in each state were averaged and their difference tested by a paired t-test. The scene closeness ratings, “much closer up,” “a little closer up,” “the same,” “a little farther away,” or “much farther away” were scored as −2, −1, 0, 1, and 2, respectively (R scores). Nonzero R scores were taken to indicate top-down bias overruling the veridical “same” response. Mean R scores and other measures of central tendency are mainly determined by the default, unbiased “same” ratings. Hence, they are not the most appropriate statistics for rare and biased ratings. Instead we, used the extreme values (the minimum and the maximum) of R score distributions. Extreme values are commonly used in analyses of rare events (Gomes and Guillou 2015) and dynamical systems analysis (Faranda et al. 2013). Certain response strategies could, in principle, interfere with the analysis, such as a tendency to respond that the second image is larger. To control for this possibility, effects observed in the extreme values can only be ascribed to control if they don’t occur in the means. Thus, for the R scores, three summary statistics, the minimum, mean, and maximum, were obtained. These, respectively, were compared between focused and mind-wandering states. For this, because extreme value distributions are non-Gaussian and asymmetric, the Brunner–Munzel test (Brunner and Munzel 2000, implemented in R-library “lawstat”) was used. This analysis corresponds to Results, Summary of NoTs and R scores, and.

NoTs and R scores were processed for reconstruction of the mind-wandering trajectories. Here, we outline the processing; details are reported in, Part 2, Data analysis for trajectory reconstruction. Data were firstly standardized, in order to counteract individual differences in response tendencies: For each participant, we subtracted from the raw R scores their individual minimum, mean, and maximum R score to obtain, respectively: dMin R score, dMean R score, and dMax R scores. For the sake of consistency, the same standardization was applied to the NoTs, yielding dMin NoTs, dMean NoTs, and dMax NoTs. The remaining procedure was applied to each of these six measures.

Next, secondly, the 2 weeks probe time series of each participant was segmented, based on probes in which mind wandering was reported. Each segment extends over a 17-hour period, from 8 hours prior till 9 hours after a report of mind wandering. Since the probe data were obtained at uneven time intervals, in order to convert them to series with equal time intervals, i.e. interval series, probes were binned into 1-hour intervals. This yielded interval series of 17 one-hour binned data (from Bin −8 to Bin 8. Bin 0 included the reference mind wandering) per participant. A grand average over participants was taken for each bin.

Thirdly, probability distributions for the grand averages were obtained through bootstrapping (Efron 1992). Bootstrapped distributions were needed to take into account factors such as uneven numbers of probes across participants and bins, and the temporal dependency of the samples. Each grand average was assigned the percentile value in the corresponding bootstrapped distribution: the higher the percentile NoTs, the higher the number of thoughts; the higher the percentile R score, the higher the level of deliberate constraints.

Finally, the trajectories of the mind-wandering process were plotted in terms of percentile NoTs and R scores.


Results


Excluded data

Of the 32 participants, four who responded to less than 40 probes were excluded. Moreover, probes which were not received or responded to properly (e.g. incomplete answers) were discarded. Thus, the remaining analyses were made on 1807 samples from 28 participants. Of the remaining samples, 31 ones, in which participants reported being under the influence of alcohol (Question 15) or experienced display problems in the scene closeness rating test, were excluded from data analysis. Therefore, the total number of valid probes is 1776 (out of the maximally possible 32 × 71 = 2272), on average 61.14 probes per participant [SD = 9.46, 95% confidence interval is (57.48–64.81)].


Probing period

Of the remaining 28 participants, 6 chose 9:00–21:00, 15 chose 10:00–22:00, and 7 chose 11:00–23:00, as daily probing period.


Questionnaire results

Data from Question 1 (number of thoughts) were entered to the Interval series analysis to be reported later. This section concerns Questions 2–15. Question 2 asks whether participants experienced mind wandering just before a probe arrived. The participants on grand average reported 62.42% [SD = 17.35; the 95% confidence interval is (55.69–69.14)] of the times that they were focusing on a specific task. Percentage of mind wandering with task was 17.53% [SD = 11.06; the 95% confidence interval is (13.24–21.82)], that of mind wandering without task was 18.28% [SD = 12.43, 95% confidence interval is (13.46–23.09)]. When both types of mind wandering are combined, the percentage (35.81%), is similar to that (32%) reported by Kane et al. (2017), in which experience sampling was performed with 274 American undergraduates. Possible influence of the days of week on mind wandering was evaluated by a chi-squared test, but the frequencies did not vary between days of the week, χ2 (6) = 2.52, P > 0.10, and χ2 (6) = 2.77, P > 0.10, for mind wandering with and without task, respectively. Thus, for the following analysis the data were collapsed over the days of the week. In case mind wandered from a task, participants reported the types of tasks (Question 12). School-related tasks were reported more than 50% of the times.

The duration of mind wandering (Question 3) did not differ between with or without task; on average, 10.98 min [SD = 3.62, the 95% confidence interval is (9.57–12.38)] versus 10.66 min [SD = 3.29, the 95% confidence interval is (9.39–11.94)], respectively. A paired t-test resulted in t(27) = 0.82, P > 0.10.

Answers to Questions 4–9, 13, and 14 which involved qualitative aspects of their mind-wandering state are summarized in. Results of five-point rating questions were compared between mind wandering with and without task using a two-way ANOVA (with/without task by eight questions). The test showed no main effect of task, F(1, 423) = 0.59, P > 0.10, nor an interaction F(7, 432) = 0.15, P > 0.10.

On the topics of mind wandering, free form answers (Question 10) varied widely and were sometimes incomplete. As a consequence, we omitted the result from the analysis. The objects of mind wandering (Question 11) were, “yourself” or “friends” in more than 50% of the times; “nobody in particular” and “partner” followed in both types of mind wandering. The percentages for “acquaintance(s)” and “family member(s)” were about 5% and the difference in the rank order between the two types of mind wandering was considered negligible given their standard deviations. These results showed that the topic rankings are practically indistinguishable for the two types of mind wandering. In subsequent analyses, mind-wandering samples with and without a task were pooled.


Summary of NoTs and R scores

Larger numbers of thoughts were reported in mind wandering than in task focused states, t(27) = 9.45, P < 0.001. The mean NoTs were 1.86 [SD = 0.65; the 95% confidence interval is (1.00–2.96)] and 1.03 [SD = 0.45; the 95% confidence interval is (0.23–2.07)], respectively.

Frequency distributions of individual minimum, mean, and maximum R scores are shown in for mind wandering and task focused states, respectively. Note that a score closer to zero (‘the same’ response to the second image) implies a smaller bias, i.e. less deliberate constraints to the task. The distributions, in particular those for the extreme values, were non-Gaussian and asymmetric. To statistically evaluate the difference between two non-Gaussian and asymmetric distributions, the Brunner–Munzel test was used (Brunner and Munzel 2000, implemented in R-library “lawstat”). We report the results in the form: BM (xx) = yy, P < zz, where xx represent estimated degrees of freedom, yy the value of the statistic, and zz its significance level. The test results in the minimum values was, BM (53.12) = 2.14, P = 0.03. According to this result, deliberate constraints were relaxed during mind wandering compared with focused states. The maximum scores also suggested relaxed deliberate control in mind wandering than in focused states, however, BM (52.45) = −1.53, P = 0.13 failed to reach significance. (In a follow-up laboratory experiment both minimum and maximum R score distinguished focused and mind-wandering states. cf., Part 1.) According to the means, the two mental states were indistinguishable, BM (50.93) = 0.58, P = 0.56. This implies that the effects observed for the extreme values, in particular the minimum, cannot be attributed to specific response tendencies. We may conclude that R scores can distinguish mind wandering and focused states, showing lower deliberate constraints in mind wandering than in task focused states.


Interval series analysis


Summary of binning

Not all bins contain samples from all participants, because of the pseudorandom interprobe interval used (between 10 and 144 min). Bins −8 to +8, respectively, contained one or more samples from 19, 25, 25, 27, 26, 26, 26, 26, 28, 27, 28, 27, 27, 27, 25, 21, and 18 participants (out of max. 28). The number of samples falls off for early and late bins because probes were made over the period of wakefulness, excluding the period between 10:00 PM to 8:59 AM. No segment bridged over successive day times, e.g. not Bin −8 at 8:00 PM to 8:59 PM and Bin +8 at 11:00 AM to 11:59 AM of the next day. This means, for instance, that for a mind-wandering report given in response to an 11:00 AM probe, there are no data for the hours between Bins −8 and −3. The difference in number was one of the reasons for using bootstrapping in the data analysis.

Mind wandering took place more than once within a 12-h probing period, in 10.95% of the 14 days. Because of this, the same data points could appear in different segments. For instance, when mind wandering occurred at 12:00 and 14:30 on a single day, the first segment is cut from the probe at 12:00, and the mind-wandering probes are assigned to Bin 0 and Bin 2. The second segment is cut from the probe at 14:30, and the mind-wandering probes are assigned to Bin 3 and Bin 0. Our results are not distorted by multiple binning of mind-wandering events, as long as they are homogeneously distributed outside of Bin 0. To check for homogeneity, the average probability of a mind-wandering report across participants is computed for each bin. The grand averages are shown in. Note that the probability at Bin 0 does not become one because some reports of focused states were also included in this bin. Excluding Bin 0, a one-way ANOVA (repeated measures, 16 bins) showed no effect of bins on the probability of mind wandering, F(15, 384) = 0.76, P > 0.10. We conclude that, except for the reference Bin 0, mind-wandering events were homogeneously distributed over the bins.


Interval series of NoTs and R scores

Interval series analysis was applied to standardized NoTs and R scores, dMin NoTs, dMean NoTs, dMax NoTs dMin R score, dMean R score, and dMax R score. Given that the minimum R score was shown to be most sensitive to differences in mental states, results in dMean NoTs and dMin R score are shown in the main text. The remaining results are included in, Part 2.

shows the percentile scores of grand average NoTs in time. The graph shows that NoTs oscillates in cycles of 4–6 h. NoTs was in the top percentile at Bin 0. This reconfirms our earlier observation that mind wandering leads to an increase in the number of thoughts concurrently in mind. However, adjacent bins show high scores as well. In Bin −1, i.e. 1 h before the mind-wandering event, the value already reached the 80th percentile and in Bin 1, 1 h after the mind wandering, it was still at the 85th percentile. The high NoTs in the Bins −1 and 1 are not due to the occurrence of mind wandering, which is average in these bins. The results clearly showed that high levels of NoTs sustained before and after a mind wandering.

shows the percentile scores of grand average R score in time. The higher percentile values of the score indicate more deliberate constraints. Before mind wandering, the percentile scores were high at relatively constant levels, above the median of the bootstrap data, dropped to the minimum at Bin 0, then slowly recovered from thereon in over the next 4 h.


The trajectory of mind wandering

Based on the NoTs and the R score, mind-wandering trajectories were reconstructed. Each point in the trajectory represents a 1-h bin. Disks around the points indicate inter-individual difference in the trajectory (details of the inter-individual difference measure are in, Part 2). The part of the trajectory before reaching a mind-wandering state is indicated in blue. Eight to 4 h before (Bins −8 to −4), the mind dwells in the upper-right region. This region may be called the “multitasking” region since in this region, the mind is occupied with many thoughts and operates with high deliberate constraints. The trajectory then proceeds for the next 2 h (Bins −3 to −2) to the lower-right region, where the number of thoughts is small and deliberate constraints are high. One hour before the mind wandering (Bin −1) the trajectory rapidly transits back to a state where both the NoTs and the constraints are high. Another rapid transition follows from Bin −1 to Bin 0, the bin where the mind-wandering takes place. The NoTs increase from the 80th to the 100th percentile, while the constraints decrease sharply.

The orange part of the trajectory in indicates the trajectory after mind wandering. The state 1 h after the interception of mind wandering (Bin 1) shows decrease in number of thoughts, in combination with increase deliberate constraints. The next state (Bin 2) shows continuation of these trends. Between 3 and 8 h after a mind wandering (Bin 3 to Bin 8), the trajectory meanders: the system oscillates and slowly comes back to the median level.

The inter-individual variability in the trajectory is shown in. The trajectory showed a high consistency across individuals for at least some of the time periods. The trajectory converged several hours before mind wandering (Bins −7 and −5), and started diverging afterwards. The divergence peaked at the mind-wandering bin (Bin 0), and then converged again (Bins 2 and 3). The results show that mental states follow a slowly evolving dynamic trajectory in the hours before and after mind wandering.


General Discussion

Application of experience sampling revealed long-term dynamics of thought generation and cognitive control in the wakeful hours before and after mind wandering. Thought generation rates show a 4–6 h cycle. The cycle falls in the range of ultradian rhythms (1.5–7 h). Ultradian rhythms are a family of biological rhythms observed in behavior, body temperature, cortical EEG, and hormone secretion across mammalian species (Tannenbaum and Martin 1976; Ibuka et al. 1977; Ruis et al. 1987). Ibuka et al. (1977) showed that the ultradian rhythm of 4–7 hours in rats’ behavior and EEG is accentuated by lesion of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the master circadian rhythm generator. Ultradian rhythms have been related to monoaminergic neuronal populations in the upper brainstem and midbrain that have a key role in arousal promotion (Brown et al. 2012). In a mice study of these populations, dopamine neurons had a key role in tuning ultradian rhythms in locomotor behavior (Blum et al. 2014). The system for generation and tuning of ultradian rhythms is considered common across mammals. In the current human behavioral study, the 4–6 h cycle of thought generation matches with the daytime activity-rest rhythm, e.g. breakfast at 7:00 AM, course work, lunch at 12:00 PM, course work, tea at 4:00 PM, and so forth. Our results suggest that thought generation could be regulated by ultradian rhythm generators, together with physiological, endocrinological, and behavioral phenomena.

The mind-wandering literature attributes the spontaneous thought generation function to a class of networks, which includes the medial temporal lobule and hippocampus (Blumenfeld et al. 2011; Ellamil et al. 2012; Beaty et al. 2015; Christoff et al. 2016). It is an open question, how this functional network is affected by the ultradian rhythm. A recent study on the emotion network (which includes amygdala, insula, striatum, and orbitofrontal cortex) suggests that the endocrinological ultradian rhythm, in particular that of the plasma glucocorticoid level, keeps this network tuned to emotional stimuli (Kalafatakis et al. 2018). Subsystems of the thought generation network, such as hippocampus, are also sensitive to glucocorticoids. Thus, the ultradian rhythm might also regulate the responsivity of the thought generation system.

The dimension of cognitive control showed a pattern, different from the 4–6 h cycle of the number of thoughts. Deliberate constraints are sustained at high level before mind wandering, until a rapid drop occurs around 1 h before mind-wandering onset. Afterwards, the trajectory bounces back but eventually settles on moderate values of deliberate constraints. This pattern might be explained in terms of self-feedback of the cognitive control system. As the level of control starts falling, self-feedback pushes the level up. The “bounce back” suggests a delay, or integral gain, of the feedback. Functional MRI studies map cognitive control function to coactivation of anterior cingulate cortex/presupplementary motor area, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal junction, anterior insular cortex, dorsal premotor cortex, and posterior parietal cortex (Duncan and Owen 2000; Schneider and Chein 2003; Brass et al. 2005; Chein and Schneider 2005). The studies did not discuss BOLD activity of the network in terms of self-feedback. However, some of the results are suggestive. For example, BOLD activity of the network alternated “push” (one and more BOLD peaks) and “relaxation” (low or no peak) periods in the time scale of minutes (Cole and Schneider 2007). Our observations may suggest that neural mechanisms of cognitive control may vary dynamically on the time scale of hours as well.

Whereas both the number of thoughts and the deliberate constraints measure suggest long-term regularity, their relationship as shown on the trajectory is far from a simple correlation. Seven to 5 h before mind wandering, participants were within the “multitasking” state with relatively small interparticipant variability. Around 4 h before mind wandering, the interparticipant variability increased, suggesting the participants were escaping at different rates from “multitasking” to a state more amenable to single-task focusing. About 1 h before the mind wandering, participants moved back to a “multitasking” state. Then, the level of deliberate constraints quickly decreases. As, thus, cognitive control was suddenly lost, participants drifted into mind wandering. Afterwards, the participants moved to a state with a small number of thoughts. A segment 2–3 h after the mind wandering showed low interparticipant variability. The probe made the participants aware of their mind wandering. The induced awareness could let cognitive control increase the level of constraints more or less in the same timing for all participants.

Such intricate coordination between the thought generation and cognitive control systems could be implemented via activity of locus coeruleus norepinephrine system (LC-NE) (Mittner et al. 2016). LC-NE receives input from the cortical cognitive control network and the subcortical biological rhythm generators, and projects throughout the brain. It shows slow (tonic) activity and fast (phasic) activity which are related to attention control, such as switching of attention to incoming sensory information. The interaction of these subnetworks determines the state of the whole central nervous system. The coordination observed in the dynamics of mind wandering may be a product of this interaction.

The relationship between metacognitive awareness of mind wandering and cognitive control is listed as one of the open questions in the phenomenology of mind wandering (Smallwood and Schooler 2006). The prompts sent during experience sampling might, in principle, elicit a level of metacognitive awareness that disrupts the mind wandering. This may explain the consistency, with which participants afterwards move to a state with a small number of thoughts. On the other hand, in real life, disruptions are the order of the day, so the probes may not retain their salience long enough have an exceptional impact on the mind-wandering process. The unfinished business resulting from the disruption (Zeigarnik 1938) may, in principle, have impelled the continuation of mind wandering after the probe. Therefore, how natural and induced metacognitive awareness influence to cognitive control remains as one of the open questions.

Vice versa, the slow dynamics inevitably affects to events on the faster time scale. For example, lapses of attention (Cheyne et al. 2006) and intentional control over mind wandering (Seli et al. 2016) have been observed and described in a time scale faster than that in the current study. We would expect to find that these processes are modulated by the long-term trajectories observed in our 2D state space.

From the trajectories we could, in principle, isolate a classical mind-wandering cycle: loss of control, proliferation of thoughts, mind wandering, resumption of control, decrease of thought proliferation. However, whereas such a description is based around discrete events in the state space, the trajectories are continuous. Order of events does not equal causality; this sequence is embedded in a long-term regularity, spanning several hours before and after a mind-wandering event. Moreover, the discrete events are not necessarily in the focal regions where individual trajectories converge, like the uniform movement 2–3 h after mind wandering. Future research may benefit from the identification of possible underlying variables, which we were able to perform with a simple observational method; in particular, the identification of long-term context as relevant for the incidence of mind wandering.


How experimental procedures influence estimates of metacognitive ability

Dobromir Rahnev, Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6556214, CC BY 4.0.

It is becoming widely appreciated that higher stimulus sensitivity trivially increases estimates of metacognitive sensitivity. Therefore, meaningful comparisons of metacognitive ability across conditions and observers necessitates equating stimulus sensitivity. To achieve this, one common approach is to use a continuous staircase that runs throughout the duration of the experiment under the assumption that this procedure has no influence on the estimated metacognitive ability. Here we critically examine this assumption. Using previously published data, we find that, compared to using a single level of stimulus contrast, staircase techniques lead to inflated estimates of metacognitive ability across a wide variety of measures including area under the type 2 ROC curve, the confidence-accuracy correlation phi, meta-d′, meta-d′/d′, and meta-d′–d′. Furthermore, this metacognitive inflation correlates with the degree of stimulus variability experienced by each subject. These results suggest that studies using a staircase approach are likely to report inflated estimates of metacognitive ability. Furthermore, we argue that similar inflation likely occurs in the presence of variability in task difficulty caused by other factors such as fluctuations in alertness or gradual improvement on the task. We offer practical solutions to these issues, both in the design and analysis of metacognition experiments.


Introduction

Humans have the ability to reflect on their own decisions and judge how likely they are to be correct (Metcalfe and Shimamura 1994; Shimamura 2000; Fleming et al. 2012a). The ability to evaluate one’s accuracy using confidence ratings is a common measure of metacognitive ability. Individual differences in metacognitive ability have been found to correlate with brain structure and function (Fleming et al. 2010; Yokoyama et al. 2010; Baird et al. 2013; McCurdy et al. 2013; Rahnev et al. 2015; Allen et al. 2017), as well as behavioral measures such as psychiatric symptom dimensions (Rouault et al. 2018). Because estimation of metacognitive ability is central to understanding the psychological and neural mechanisms supporting metacognition and introspection, and may serve as a future clinical tool, it is of critical importance that these measures be as precise as possible.

A well-recognized hurdle in estimating subject-specific metacognitive ability is the influence of primary task performance on estimated metacognitive performance (Galvin et al. 2003; Maniscalco and Lau 2012). Specifically, higher task performance (reflected in higher “type 1” sensitivity, d′) has been shown to naturally lead to higher estimates of metacognitive sensitivity (Maniscalco and Lau 2014). It has been proposed that this effect can be minimized or removed by instead using measures of “metacognitive efficiency” (Fleming and Lau 2014) such as meta-d′/d′. We return to this issue in the Discussion section. Nevertheless, unless measures of metacognitive efficiency are employed, comparisons of metacognitive abilities of different subjects—or the metacognitive ability of the same subject in different experimental conditions—necessitate matching task performance across subjects or conditions.

In studies of metacognition of simple perceptual judgments, it is becoming common for researchers to employ a staircase procedure that adjusts the stimulus intensity throughout the experiment to achieve uniformity in stimulus sensitivity between subjects (Fleming et al. 2010, 2012b; Allen et al. 2017). This procedure is typically successful in ensuring that performance is close to a predetermined level (typically around 71% correct). Staircases are less common in other task domains such as memory, partly because they are more complex to design and implement (although see Carpenter et al. 2019), but we anticipate the effects of staircases on measurement of metacognition that we outline below will also manifest in other domains beyond perception.

The continuous staircase introduces stimulus variability with the tacit assumption that this variability has no direct influence on the estimated metacognitive ability. However, mixing low and high contrast stimuli may make it easier for confidence ratings to distinguish between correct and incorrect trials. To illustrate this point, consider an extreme case in which a subject is presented with an even mixture of zero-contrast trials (producing 50% correct) and full-contrast trials (producing 100% correct). The subject’s performance over all trials would thus be 75% correct, equivalent to that produced by intermediate-contrast trials. At the same time, the subject would trivially classify all zero-contrast trials with low confidence and full-contrast trials with high confidence. In contrast, categorizing intermediate-contrast trials with low and high confidence would necessarily be more difficult since all trials are similar to each other. Therefore, confidence ratings for intermediate-contrast trials would be less informative compared to the extreme mixture of zero- and full-contrast trials. In other words, an even mixture of zero- and full-contrast trials would produce the same type 1 performance as exclusively presenting intermediate-contrast trials but will likely be characterized by much better type 2 performance (confidence ratings will be more informative of accuracy). Thus, a mixture of difficult and easy trials would be expected to lead to an inflated estimate of metacognitive ability compared to the presentation of a single, intermediate difficulty level.

The notion that mixing different contrasts leads to inflated estimates of metacognitive ability has received recent empirical support. In Experiment 3 of their paper, Bang et al. (2019) found that mixing increasingly dissimilar contrast levels led to increasing estimates of metacognitive ability. However, Bang et al. only tested the influence of such mixtures on the measures meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′, so it is possible that the effects were partly driven by the specific assumptions inherent in these measures. More importantly, the mixtures in Bang et al. (2019) contained equal number of trials coming from each contrast, but staircase procedures result in a bell-shaped curve of contrast prevalence such that intermediate contrasts are presented many times and very low and high contrasts are presented fewer times. It thus remains unclear whether staircase procedures lead to a similar inflation of metacognitive ability (as compared to using a single contrast), especially across a more divergent set of measures of metacognitive ability.

Here, we tested directly whether a staircase procedure results in inflated estimates of metacognitive ability as compared to estimates of metacognitive ability based on a single difficulty level. To do so, we re-analyzed data from Fleming et al. (2010) in which healthy subjects gave confidence ratings following 2-interval forced choice contrast discrimination judgments. A two-down one-up staircase ran throughout the task to maintain performance at ∼71% correct. In the original paper, Fleming et al. reported variation in the area under the type 2 ROC (type 2 AUC) as a key measure of metacognitive ability, finding that it was uncorrelated with type 1 performance and was predicted by gray matter volume and white matter integrity in the anterior prefrontal cortex.

We computed five different common measures of metacognitive ability across three levels of stimulus variability: a single contrast level, three contiguous contrast levels, and the full range of contrast levels used in the original experiment. To anticipate, we found that increased stimulus variability led to increased estimates of metacognitive ability across all five measures. Furthermore, the level of increase between the single contrast and the full range of contrasts correlated positively with the specific amount of stimulus variability experienced by each subject. These results suggest that a mixture of difficulty levels inherent in staircase procedures indeed leads to inflated estimates of metacognitive ability.


Methods


Subjects

The Fleming et al. (2010) dataset consists of 32 subjects (17 females; range 19–37 years). Just as in the original publication, we excluded one subject from further analysis due to aberrant psychophysical task performance [their d′ was more than three standard deviations (SDs) higher than the group mean]. The study was approved by the local Research Ethics Committee and all subjects gave written informed consent.


Task and procedures

All experimental details are available in Fleming et al. (2010). Briefly, subjects completed a 2-interval forced choice in which they indicated whether the first or second temporal interval contained a pop-out Gabor patch of higher contrast. Each interval contained six Gabor patches of 20% contrast, except for a single Gabor patch of higher contrast (between 23% and 80%) that could occur in either the first or the second interval. The contrast of the pop-out Gabor patch was continually adjusted via two-down one-up staircase procedure with a fixed step size of 3% contrast to maintain ∼71% performance. The procedure decreased the stimulus contrast after every incorrect trial and increased it after two consecutive correct trials. On every trial, subjects provided a confidence rating on a six-point scale. No feedback was given until the end of the experiment. Subjects completed a practice session, followed by the main experiment consisting of six blocks of 100 trials each. There was a small practice effect such that both the mean contrast and variability of contrast values decreased after block 1. Therefore, Fleming et al. (2010) only analyzed the data from blocks 2–6. Here we follow the same procedure.


Measures of metacognitive ability

To ensure that our results are not due to the idiosyncrasies of a specific measure, we computed metacognitive ability via five different measures that are common in the literature. For all five measures, the raw confidence levels from the six-point scale were used. First, we computed type 2 AUC: the area under the type 2 ROC curve, which is the same measure used in Fleming et al. (2010). Second, we computed phi (Kornell et al. 2007): the Pearson correlation between confidence and accuracy. Finally, we computed three measures derived from the work of Maniscalco and Lau (2012): meta-d′, meta-d′/d′, and meta-d′–d′. These five measures each invoke different sets of assumptions (Fleming and Lau 2014) and therefore we used all of them in our study (the three measures stemming from the work of Maniscalco and Lau are based on the same model but the different ways of normalizing meta-d′ come with different inherent assumptions about the best way to quantify the underlying metacognitive ability).

To compute type 2 AUC, we used the same steps as described in Fleming et al. (2010). Briefly, for each confidence criterion, we computed type 2 hit and false alarm rates, where type 2 hits are defined as high confidence correct responses, type 2 misses as low confidence correct responses, type 2 false alarms as high confidence incorrect responses, and type 2 correct rejections as low confidence incorrect responses. We constructed a type 2 ROC curve based on the type 2 hit and false alarm rates estimated at each level of confidence, and the area under that curve produced the type 2 AUC measure.

To compute phi, we created an accuracy variable where we coded each correct response as “1” and each incorrect response as “0.” The measure phi was then computed as the across-trial Pearson correlation of this accuracy variable and the confidence ratings produced on different trials.

Finally, to compute meta-d′, meta-d′/d′, and meta-d′–d′, we used the code provided by Maniscalco and Lau (2012). The measure meta-d′ is computed by determining the d′ value that would produce the observed type 2 hit and false alarm rates under a signal detection theory model which assumes perfect metacognition. The additional measures meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′ were obtained by normalizing meta-d′ by d′ via division or subtraction, respectively.


Analyses

To compare how estimates of metacognitive ability change systematically across different levels of stimulus variability, we created three subsets of the data with increasing amount of stimulus variability.

First, for each subject, we found the contrast level that the subject experienced most frequently. The most common contrast was presented on average 122.1 times per subject (SD = 19.7). We then computed all five measures of metacognition based only on the subset of trials in which subjects experienced this contrast value. We call this the “1-contrast” condition to indicate that it consisted of trials of a single contrast.

Second, for each subject, we determined a set of three consecutive contrast values such that the most common contrast (used in the first condition) was always the middle contrast. In other words, in this condition we analyzed the most common contrast together with its two “flanking” contrasts, which were the closest contrasts to the most common one and differed from it by a single step size of the staircasing procedure. This condition included on average 320.3 trials per subject (SD = 45). Each measure of metacognitive ability was then computed for all trials within this subset. We call this the “3-contrast” condition to indicate that it consisted of trials of three contiguous contrast values.

Third, we computed all metacognition measures based on all 500 trials experienced by each subject irrespective of contrast. Note that this is how the data were analyzed in Fleming et al. (2010). We call this the “all-contrast” condition to indicate that it consisted of all contrast values used in the experiment.

We compared the estimated measures in each of these three conditions using one-way repeated measures ANOVAs (with factor condition) and followed up with the paired t-tests. We further investigated whether the differences in estimated metacognitive ability between conditions could be due to the different number of trials that went into each of the three conditions. For each subject, we considered the pool of trials in the 3- and all-contrast conditions and drew a random sample of these trials such that the size of the sample was equal to the number of trials in the 1-contrast condition for that subject. We repeated the procedure 100 times and re-did the analyses above using the averaged metacognitive scores across all 100 samples in the 3- and all-contrast conditions.

Finally, we correlated the amount of stimulus variability experienced by each subject with the amount of metacognitive inflation caused by the use of the staircase. Stimulus variability was defined as the SD of the contrast values experienced by each subject normalized by the average contrast value. Metacognitive inflation was defined separately for each measure of metacognitive ability as the difference in the estimated value in the all-contrast and the 1-contrast conditions: where M refers to a particular measure of metacognitive ability. Finally, we performed a Pearson correlation to compute the level of association between stimulus variability and metacognitive inflation across subjects.


Data and code

Processed data, together with MATLAB codes that generate all figures and statistical results, are freely available at: https://github.com/DobyRahnev/staircase_meta_inflation.


Results

We investigated whether increased stimulus variability caused by continuously adjusting stimulus contrast affects various measures of metacognitive ability. To do so, we defined three conditions with increasing stimulus variability: (i) “1-contrast” condition, in which we analyzed only the contrast experienced most frequently by each subject, (ii) “3-contrast” condition, in which we analyzed the most frequent contrast together with its two flanking contrasts, and (iii) “all-contrast” condition, in which all stimulus contrasts were analyzed (a graphical depiction is provided in).

We first compared how stimulus sensitivity, d′, was affected by the three stimulus variability conditions. A one-way repeated measures ANOVA showed no significant differences between conditions [F(2, 60) = 0.71, P = 0.49; individual data and observation densities in the form of raincloud plots (Allen et al. 2018) are shown in]. Furthermore, the paired t-tests did not show significant difference between any pair of conditions [1-contrast vs. 3-contrast: t(30) = 1.07, P = 0.29; 1-contrast vs. all-contrast: t(30) = 0.81, P = 0.42; 3-contrast vs. all-contrast: t(30) = −0.05, P = 0.96]. In addition, the average d′ across the three conditions did not correlate across subjects with either the experienced stimulus variability (r = 0.07, P = 0.7) or the pairwise differences between the metacognitive scores for the all- and 1-contrast conditions (type 2 AUC: r = −0.2, P = 0.28; phi: r = −0.18, P = 0.32; meta-d′: r = −0.19, P = 0.34; meta-d′/d′: r = −0.06, P = 0.76; meta-d′–d′: r = 0.01, P = 0.95). These results suggest that the three conditions were well matched on primary task performance and any differences in metacognitive ability cannot be attributed to differences in task performance.

We next turned to the critical question regarding the effect of stimulus variability on the estimated metacognitive ability. To avoid biasing our results by the idiosyncrasies of any individual measure, we examined the effect of stimulus variability on five different measures of metacognitive ability: type 2 AUC, phi, meta-d′, meta-d′/d′, and meta-d′–d′ (see Methods section). For each measure, we conducted a one-way repeated measures ANOVA to check for differences between the different conditions. We found that in all cases the estimated metacognitive ability was significantly influenced by the level of stimulus variability [type 2 AUC: F(2, 60) = 8.66, P = 0.0005; phi: F(2, 60) = 8.38, P = 0.0006; meta-d′: F(2, 60) = 9.68, P = 0.0002; meta-d′/d′: F(2, 60) = 8.45, P = 0.0006; meta-d′–d′: F(2, 60) = 9.61, P = 0.0002; individual data and observation densities in the form of raincloud plots (Allen et al. 2018) are shown in].

To understand the nature of the observed differences in metacognition, we compared different pairs of conditions using the paired t-tests. First, we compared the 1-contrast and all-contrast conditions. We found that the all-contrast condition led to significantly higher estimates of metacognitive ability for all five measures [type 2 AUC: difference = 0.034; t(30) = 3.18, P = 0.003, Cohen’s d = 0.57; phi: difference = 0.047; t(30) = 3.18, P = 0.003, Cohen’s d = 0.57; meta-d′: difference = 0.238; t(30) = 3.38, P = 0.002, Cohen’s d = 0.61; meta-d′/d′: difference = 0.178; t(30) = 3.3, P = 0.003, Cohen’s d = 0.59; meta-d′–d′: difference = 0.253; t(30) = 3.51, P = 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.63]. Comparing the 3-contrast and all-contrast conditions produced smaller differences in estimated metacognitive ability but all these differences were nevertheless highly significant (P < 0.0009 and Cohen’s d > 0.66 for all measures; detailed statistical results are reported in Supplementary Results). The fact that the differences between the 3-contrast and all-contrast conditions produced consistently lower P-values than the difference between the 1-contrast and all-contrast condition is likely due to the smaller number of trials in the 1-contrast condition (which led to higher variability in estimated metacognitive ability). Finally, the comparison between the 1-contrast and 3-contrast conditions was significant for four of the five measures [type 2 AUC: t(30) = 2.07, P = 0.047; meta-d′: t(30) = 2.4, P = 0.022; meta-d′/d′: t(30) = 2.12, P = 0.042; meta-d′–d′: t(30) = 2.3, P = 0.028] and non-significant for one measure [phi: t(30) = 1.95, P = 0.061].

One difference between the three conditions is that they were not matched for number of trials: the 1-contrast condition included on average 122 trials per subject, the 3-contrast condition included on average 320 trials per subject, and the all-contrast condition always included all 500 trials per subject. Previous research has suggested that the number of trials can bias measures of metacognitive ability (Fleming 2017). Therefore, in a control analysis, we created 100 random samples from the 3- and all-contrast conditions such that each sample contained the same number of trials as the 1-contrast condition for that subject. We then averaged the metacognitive scores obtained from these 100 samples and repeated the above analyses. We obtained very similar results: all five ANOVAs remained significant (all P < 0.0015; detailed statistical results are reported in Supplementary Results) and so did all five pairwise comparisons between the 1- and all-contrast conditions (all P < 0.0065; detailed statistical results are reported in Supplementary Results). Thus, the increase in the estimated metacognitive ability with increasing contrast ranges cannot be explained by the difference in number of trials between the conditions.

These results establish that conditions that feature increasingly divergent contrast levels result in increasingly higher estimates of metacognitive ability. We quantified this metacognitive inflation as the difference in estimated metacognitive ability between the all-contrast and 1-contrast conditions (i.e., where M refers to a particular measure of metacognitive ability).

To identify the causes of metacognitive inflation, we next investigated whether this inflation depends on the particular level of stimulus variability experienced by a given subject. For each subject, we determined the level of experienced stimulus variability (computed as the ratio of the SD across all experienced contrasts and the average contrast). In addition, for each of the five measures, we computed metacognitive inflation as the difference in metacognitive ability between the all-contrast and 1-contrast conditions. Finally, we correlated these two quantities separately for each of the five measures of metacognition. We found that, for each measure, metacognitive inflation was significantly correlated with stimulus variability (type 2 AUC: r = 0.43, P = 0.014; phi: r = 0.44, P = 0.013; meta-d′: r = 0.49, P = 0.005; meta-d′/d′: r = 0.42, P = 0.018; meta-d′–d′: r = 0.5, P = 0.004; one subject exhibited slightly higher stimulus variability than the rest of the group; all correlations remain significant even after excluding this subject). In other words, the inflation of metacognitive ability was larger for subjects who experienced greater stimulus variability, further underscoring a link between these quantities.

Since stimulus variability is related to metacognitive inflation, it is important to consider what causes the difference in stimulus variability between subjects. Part of the answer is clearly random chance—the accuracy of individual responses is stochastic and therefore by chance alone some subjects will experience longer streaks of correct and incorrect responses than others, leading to higher stimulus variability. Nevertheless, it is possible that stimulus variability is at least partly driven by meaningful individual differences. One such potential difference is variability in metacognitive ability itself. Specifically, subjects with lower intrinsic metacognitive ability could be inherently more variable in their responses. If this is true, then metacognitive ability on the 1-contrast condition may correlate negatively with stimulus variability. Note that the 1-contrast condition consisted of a single contrast and therefore the metacognitive ability within that condition is statistically independent of subject-specific stimulus variability. Despite this, we observed a robust negative correlation such that higher metacognitive ability in the 1-contrast condition was associated with lower experienced stimulus variability (type 2 AUC: r = −0.64, P = 0.0001; phi: r = −0.63, P = 0.0001; meta-d′: r = −0.65, P = 0.00008; meta-d′/d′: r = −0.58, P = 0.0005; meta-d′–d′: r = −0.61, P = 0.0003; all correlations remain significant even after again excluding the subject with highest stimulus variability). These results are consistent with the notion that the stimulus variability experienced during the staircase procedure is partly a product of intrinsic metacognitive ability (we consider other possible directions of causation in the Discussion section).


Discussion

In an effort to equalize performance between different subjects or conditions, researchers are now frequently employing a staircase that continuously adjusts stimulus contrast over the duration of the experiment. Although this method is effective in ensuring that all subjects perform close to a predetermined level, it has remained unclear whether such continuous staircases affect the estimated metacognitive ability. We re-analyzed data from Fleming et al. (2010) in order to understand the influence of the staircase method on estimates of metacognitive ability. We obtained three primary findings, summarized graphically in. First, aggregating over the different contrast levels used in the staircase leads to higher estimates of metacognitive ability compared to a condition with a single contrast. We refer to such higher estimates as “metacognitive inflation.” Second, the degree of this metacognitive inflation across subjects correlates positively with the amount of stimulus variability experienced by each subject. Third, the stimulus variability experienced by each subject correlates negatively with subjects’ metacognitive ability estimated from stimuli with a single contrast. All three of these findings were robust, holding true for each of five different measures of metacognition.


The reason for metacognitive inflation

Our most important finding was that aggregating across stimuli of different difficulty levels leads to an inflation of the estimated metacognitive ability. In other words, when easier and harder trials are analyzed together, subjects’ metacognitive abilities appear to be better than they actually are. A similar effect was previously reported for the case of meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′ in the context of mixing equal numbers of up to three different contrasts (Bang et al. 2019). Here, we show that this result holds across all popular measures of metacognitive ability and occurs even when the contrast mixture is bell-shaped, and itself a product of a staircase.

What is the reason for metacognitive inflation? As explained in the Introduction section, mixing low and high contrast stimuli may make it easier for confidence ratings to distinguish between correct and incorrect trials. When such low and high contrast stimuli are analyzed together in the same condition, they result in higher values of estimated metacognitive ability. Another potential reason for metacognitive inflation is the presence of metacognitive noise. Metacognitive noise is noise that affects confidence estimates but not perceptual decisions (Mueller and Weidemann 2008; Jang et al. 2012; De Martino et al. 2013; Maniscalco and Lau 2016; Rahnev et al. 2016; van den Berg et al. 2017; Shekhar and Rahnev 2018). Bang et al. (2019) showed that combining several contrast levels in a single analysis amplifies the external stimulus variability and thus increases the sensory noise measured in the framework of signal detection theory. Furthermore, they demonstrated that increasing sensory noise leads to a decrease in both d′ and meta-d′ but that the decrease is larger for d′. Because of these differential effects on d′ and meta-d′, higher sensory noise leads to increased metacognitive efficiency meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′. Therefore, metacognitive noise likely contributed to the increase in metacognitive efficiency scores (meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′) in the current analyses. However, since metacognitive noise decreases both d′ and meta-d′, it should have had the opposite effect on measures of metacognitive sensitivity (i.e. meta-d′, type 2 AUC, and phi) (Bang et al. 2019). Thus, we do not consider metacognitive noise as the main contributor to the metacognitive inflation observed here.


Metacognitive scores estimated from a single contrast are most informative about a subject’s intrinsic ability

We refer to the higher estimates of metacognitive ability in conditions that aggregate over multiple contrasts as “metacognitive inflation”. This nomenclature assumes that using a single contrast should be considered the baseline against which other conditions should be compared. What makes the single-contrast condition the best choice of baseline?

To answer this question, it is important to appreciate that the estimated metacognitive ability in each condition is a function of both a subject’s intrinsic ability and the properties of the stimulus mixture. Specifically, as more dissimilar contrasts are aggregated together, the estimated metacognitive ability would begin to reflect the properties of this mixture rather than the ability of the subject. Consider the extreme case discussed in the Introduction section where zero-contrast trials (producing chance performance) and full-contrast trials (producing 100% correct performance) are mixed. This type of extreme mixture would elicit the same pattern of response from all subjects where zero-contrast trials always receive low confidence and full-contrast trials always receive high confidence. This extreme condition would thus result in all subjects appearing to have the exact same (very high) metacognitive ability and would mask any true differences between subjects. To a smaller degree, less extreme mixtures would have the same effect, and what is worse, the estimated metacognitive ability could be contaminated by the fact that each subject experiences a different mixture. In contrast, metacognitive performance in a condition where a single difficulty level is presented should more closely track the intrinsic abilities of the subject. Therefore, we believe the single-contrast condition is most informative for revealing subjects’ intrinsic metacognitive ability. It is in this sense that we consider this condition a baseline against which other conditions should be compared.


Recommendations for experimental design and analysis techniques

Our findings show that to accurately estimate a subject’s intrinsic metacognitive ability, an experimenter should strive to ensure that all trials experienced by the subject have the same difficulty. Continuous staircase methods violate this recommendation as they purposefully adjust the contrast of the stimulus. Furthermore, staircases with relatively large step sizes are likely to be especially problematic, whereas staircases with very small step sizes may only induce negligible stimulus variability.

Other experimental designs feature the presentation of a few predetermined difficulty levels, which are then analyzed together. The current findings, together with the results of Bang et al. (2018), suggest that this practice can be expected to also lead to inflated estimates of metacognitive ability. Therefore, to obtain unbiased estimates, each contrast should be analyzed separately (the estimates obtained from each difficulty level could then be averaged together in order to obtain a single metacognitive score per subject).

A related problem arises from the use of stimuli that inherently vary in difficulty. For example, many neuroimaging studies employ stimulus categories such as faces, scenes, or objects. It is virtually impossible to ensure that different exemplars of these categories are matched on difficulty (e.g. it is likely that some faces are easier to recognize than others regardless of whether they are embedded in noise, backward-masked, etc.). Therefore, the use of such categories is likely to also result in metacognitive inflation compared to designs that use stimuli—such as Gabor patches, moving dots, etc.—with small or negligible differences between different exemplars.

Even when researchers include only a single contrast level of a stimulus category with individual exemplars that do not significantly vary in difficulty, it is likely that the difficulty levels experienced by a particular subject would still vary. This could happen due to learning (Watanabe and Sasaki 2015; Dosher and Lu 2017) or variations of attention over the course of the experiment (Maniscalco et al. 2017). Since both of these effects are difficult to avoid completely, it is likely that every experiment leads to at least a slight inflation of the estimated metacognitive ability and that subjects with larger learning effects or more attentional fluctuations show larger metacognitive inflation. In some cases, it may in fact be beneficial to include a continuous staircase with a very small step size in order to counteract effects of learning or distraction, especially when testing patient populations where extensive periods of training may be impractical. Nevertheless, we suspect that in most cases even such “minimal” staircases would result in higher, rather than lower, overall variability in task difficulty. These considerations highlight the need for great care in experimental design, which should be optimized for the specific constraints of each experiment.

In general, we recommend designing experiments in ways that minimize extraneous influences on the estimated metacognitive ability. Most critically, we suggest the gold standard is the use of a single level of contrast. If several levels of contrast are included, then, ideally, metacognitive ability would be computed for each of them separately and the results averaged. However, determining in advance the level of contrast that would produce a desired level of performance is always subject to error (Watson and Pelli 1983), and may fail to precisely equate subjects on primary task performance. Nevertheless, in such cases, employing measures of metacognitive efficiency such as meta-d′/d′ may be preferable to staircases in allowing a meaningful comparison of metacognitive ability between subjects with varying levels of primary task performance (Maniscalco and Lau 2012). If a continuous staircase running throughout the experiment is still judged to be needed, the variability of stimulus contrast can be estimated for each subject and included as a covariate in subsequent analyses as an approximate way of diminishing its influence. Note, however, that the metacognitive inflation introduced by combining different contrasts is unlikely to be a perfectly linear function of stimulus variability, and is therefore unlikely to be fully accounted for by a simple regression. In addition, researchers should also attempt to minimize the learning that takes place over the course of an experiment by providing subjects with an extended training period. Subjects should also be given sufficient rest throughout the experiment to minimize performance fluctuations due to fatigue and attentional lapses.

Finally, we make all of these recommendations in the context of estimating subjects’ metacognitive abilities, but the same recommendations generalize to other task domains and dependent variables. That is, for most (perhaps all) psychophysical quantities of interest, extreme mixtures of difficulty levels would necessarily elicit a pattern of responses that reflect stimulus properties rather than an individual’s ability or bias. Thus, the use of a single difficulty level may provide benefits in precision across multiple dependent measures.


Implications for previous findings using the staircase method

A number of studies have used the continuous staircase method to correlate metacognitive ability with various quantities of interest, such as brain structure and function (e.g. Fleming et al. 2010, 2012b; Allen et al. 2017). How should we interpret these findings in light of the current results?

Following the logic outlined in, suppose that previous studies set out to measure the correlation between a certain quantity (e.g. brain structure, S) and metacognitive ability (M). However, instead they measure the correlation between S and M + I, where I is the metacognitive inflation that resulted from the staircase procedure. The critical question is whether and are significantly different from each other. This question is impossible to answer in the abstract as it depends on the specifics of how much inflation has been induced, and we do not have an estimate of I that is independent of M (since I is operationalized as). However, it is likely that I depends on stimulus variability, Var, which we can measure. In fact, in the current dataset, we show that Var correlates positively with I (left). In addition, Var correlates negatively with M (right), which means that adding M and I together acts to add noise to M. Therefore, the most likely influence of analyzing is to weaken correlations that would have been obtained by analyzing, suggesting that the findings of prior studies are likely to only become stronger with the use of a constant-stimulus design.

On a practical level, as described above, one simple method for controlling for possible inflation effects is to enter staircase variability as a covariate in analyses linking M to S. Fleming et al. (2010) report this analysis in the supplement of their paper, showing that individual differences in brain structure (prefrontal gray matter volume and white matter integrity) remained significantly correlated with type 2 AUC after controlling for the mean and variability (SD) in the staircase, and staircase variability was not itself a predictor of brain structure in whole-brain analyses. The current study provides a principled rationale for the routine application of such control analyses in future studies that employ a staircase procedure, and suggests that cleaner results may be obtained with constant-stimulus designs.


How should we interpret the negative correlation between metacognitive ability and stimulus variability?

We found that the stimulus variability experienced by each subject was negatively correlated with metacognitive ability, even when that ability was estimated from stimuli presented with a single level of contrast. These results are consistent with the possibility that lower metacognitive ability causes more variable performance on the primary task. However, it is also possible that the direction of causality runs in the opposite direction, with higher stimulus variability decreasing metacognitive performance even in the single-contrast condition. The mechanism for this effect could be based on the fact that within the context of the current experiment, the single-contrast condition is embedded within trials of variable contrast, which could have influenced subjects’ responses in that condition. Indeed, confidence ratings exhibit suboptimal serial dependence (Rahnev et al. 2015; Rahnev and Denison 2018), such that subjects may use different confidence criteria in the single-contrast condition after having experienced either low or high contrast in the previous few trials. Such variability of confidence criteria would in turn result in decreased metacognitive ability (Shekhar and Rahnev 2018), thus potentially driving the observed negative correlation.

Further research is needed in order to distinguish between these two possible causes of the observed negative correlation between metacognitive ability and stimulus variability. Specifically, it would be important to test the correlation between the variability of contrasts in a staircase and the metacognitive ability estimated from a separate block of trials with a single contrast. If lower metacognitive ability can indeed be causally linked to more variable task performance, this finding would suggest that people’s metacognitive ability influences not only their confidence ratings but also affects the stability of primary task performance.


Conclusion

We have demonstrated that combining multiple difficulty levels in a single analysis leads to an inflation of estimated metacognitive ability, relative to a constant-stimulus design. While this effect can never be avoided completely, researchers should be aware of it and attempt to minimize it whenever possible. We suggest that researchers aim for a constant-stimulus design, and where this is not possible, analyze each difficulty level separately and avoid aggregating over different difficulty levels. We believe that such design considerations will provide more robust measures of metacognition, and in turn drive forward our understanding of the psychological and neural mechanisms supporting metacognition and introspection.


How experimental procedures influence estimates of metacognitive ability

Dobromir Rahnev, Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6628681, CC BY 4.0.

Neuroscience of Consciousness, Volume 2019, Issue 1, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niz009

In the original version of this article, the section ‘The reason for metacognitive inflation’ contained a small error. The corrected sentence reads as follows:

Therefore, metacognitive noise likely contributed to the increase in metacognitive efficiency scores (meta-d′/d′ and meta-d′–d′) in the current analyses but not to the increase in metacognitive sensitivity scores (meta-d′, type 2 AUC, and phi) (Bang et al. 2019).

The authors would like to apologize for any confusion this may have caused.


Exploring the role of expectations and stimulus relevance on stimulus-specific neural representations and conscious report

Erik L Meijs, Pim Mostert, Heleen A Slagter, Floris P de Lange, Simon van Gaal — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6704346, CC BY 4.0.

Subjective experience can be influenced by top-down factors, such as expectations and stimulus relevance. Recently, it has been shown that expectations can enhance the likelihood that a stimulus is consciously reported, but the neural mechanisms supporting this enhancement are still unclear. We manipulated stimulus expectations within the attentional blink (AB) paradigm using letters and combined visual psychophysics with magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recordings to investigate whether prior expectations may enhance conscious access by sharpening stimulus-specific neural representations. We further explored how stimulus-specific neural activity patterns are affected by the factors expectation, stimulus relevance and conscious report. First, we show that valid expectations about the identity of an upcoming stimulus increase the likelihood that it is consciously reported. Second, using a series of multivariate decoding analyses, we show that the identity of letters presented in and out of the AB can be reliably decoded from MEG data. Third, we show that early sensory stimulus-specific neural representations are similar for reported and missed target letters in the AB task (active report required) and an oddball task in which the letter was clearly presented but its identity was task-irrelevant. However, later sustained and stable stimulus-specific representations were uniquely observed when target letters were consciously reported (decision-dependent signal). Fourth, we show that global pre-stimulus neural activity biased perceptual decisions for a ‘seen’ response. Fifth and last, no evidence was obtained for the sharpening of sensory representations by top-down expectations. We discuss these findings in light of emerging models of perception and conscious report highlighting the role of expectations and stimulus relevance.


Introduction

What we perceive can be strongly influenced by top-down factors, such as our prior expectations about likely states of the world and the relevance of input for the task at hand (Bar 2004; Friston 2005; Bar et al. 2006; Clark 2013). According to a growing body of work, expectations, originating from past experience, can shape perception on both a neural and behavioural level (Summerfield and De Lange 2014). When sensory input matches prior expectations, performance on tasks is higher (Cheadle et al. 2015; Stein and Peelen 2015) and neural activity is attenuated (Alink et al. 2010; Kok et al. 2012; Todorovic and de Lange 2012). In such predictive brain frameworks, it is assumed that what we perceive consciously is strongly related to the brain’s best guess about the current state of the outside world (Gregory 1980; Hohwy 2012; Panichello et al. 2013; King and Dehaene 2014a).

Indeed, the idea that our subjective experience is strongly influenced by top-down factors is supported by numerous behavioural studies that have shown beneficial effects of prior knowledge on subjective perception, such as on the accuracy (Stein and Peelen 2015) or speed (Chang et al. 2015; Pinto et al. 2015) of detecting a stimulus. Likewise, it has been shown that prior knowledge increases the likelihood that a stimulus is consciously reported during the attentional blink (AB) (Martens and Johnson 2005; Visser et al. 2015; Meijs et al. 2018). Although expectations seem to affect conscious access, the neural underpinnings of these expectation-related modulations are still unclear. In a recent electroencephalographic (EEG) study, we did not find evidence that the amplitude of neural signals, as indexed by event-related potentials, explained the effect of expectations on the likelihood of conscious report of the stimulus (Meijs et al. 2018). This finding may be explained by the fact that instead of modulating the strength of neural responses, expectations may improve the signal-to-noise ratio or sharpness of the representation of stimuli (Kok et al. 2012; Bell et al. 2016) by instantiating specific perceptual templates (e.g. orientation selectivity), even before stimulus presentation (Kok et al. 2017). Because it has been shown previously that conscious perception may also be closely linked to the quality or variability of sensory representations (Schurger et al. 2010; et al.), we here investigated whether similar enhancements of neural representations also underlie the effects that expectations have on the conscious accessibility of stimuli (Meijs et al. 2018).

To this end, we used an AB task in which each trial consisted of a sequence of rapidly presented letters in which one or two targets were to be detected and reported at the end of the stream (targets were marked by placeholders). Crucially, the first target stimulus (T1) could either validly, invalidly or not predict (neutral trials) the identity of the second target (T2). Then, multivariate decoding analyses were used on magnetoencephalography (MEG) data to track the neural representations of target stimuli. Further, to explore the effects of task relevance on stimulus-specific neural activity patterns subjects also performed an additional ‘oddball’ task in which a similar rapid serial presentations of letters was presented but subjects were instructed to merely detect a contrast change of a stimulus that happened only on 10% of the trials (these oddball trials were not taken into account in the analyses). The combination of both tasks allowed us to trace the sensory processing of a letter stimulus in the absence of a target identity decision (because the identity of the letters was task-irrelevant). This decoding profile could then be compared to the decoding profile that we observed during the AB task in which subjects did have to make a perceptual decision on the presented target stimuli (target identity was task-relevant). This approach allowed us to perform within-task decoding analyses (training and testing on the AB task using k-folding) and between-task decoding analyses (training on the oddball task and testing on the AB task). Both approaches are aimed at testing different hypotheses. Training the classifier on the oddball task will extract a relatively pure sensory signal (letter identity is task-irrelevant) and therefore between-task decoding will likely isolate those neural processes in the AB task related to similar sensory stages of information processing. Based on earlier research (Kok et al. 2012), it may be predicted that these stages are also associated with the effect of expectations on conscious report. On the other hand, within-task decoding in the AB will train and test on task-relevant stimuli that require a categorical decision and therefore may additionally reveal decision-dependent processes that could also underlie the role of expectation in conscious access. Thus, our approach allowed us to examine if expectations influence visual representations at sensory and/or decision-related stages and how this influences conscious access.


Materials and Methods


Participants

We tested a total of 33 participants for this experiment. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. One participant was excluded because T1 identification performance was more than three standard deviations lower than the group average. Furthermore, four participants were excluded because their subjective estimates of T2 visibility were unreliable. When they indicated they perceived a target they were not able to identify the target correctly more often than chance-level (P > 0.05 in a binomial test). Additionally, only in the MEG analyses we excluded participants for whom the number of observations in any of the relevant conditions (usually in the invalid condition, which had less trials) was lower than 10, similar to Meijs et al. (2018). As a result, we included 28 participants (18 females, age 22.5 ± 2.8 years) in the behavioural analyses and 19 participants (12 females, age 23.0 ± 2.8 years) in the MEG analyses. For one control analysis, we included all 28 participants to rule out our selection of participant biased the results.

The experiment was approved by the local ethics committee of the Radboud University (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen; ‘Imaging Human Cognition’). Written informed consent was obtained from participants according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Compensation was either 36 Euros or course credit.


Materials

Stimuli were generated using the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard 1997) in a MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) environment. In the behavioural lab, stimuli were displayed on a 24″ BENQ LED monitor (1920 × 1080 pixels; 120 Hz). A chinrest was used to control participants’ distance from the screen (±57 cm). In the MEG environment, a PROPixx projector (VPixx Technologies Inc., Saint-Bruno, Canada) located outside the magnetically shielded room projected the stimuli onto a screen ∼80 cm in front of participants (1920 × 1080 pixels, 120 Hz). All visual input was presented on a ‘black’ background (luminance: ± 3 cd/m2) and matched for visual luminance between the two labs.


Procedure and stimuli

The experiment consisted of two sessions that were completed within 1 week. In the first session, participants performed an oddball task and in the second session an AB task (Raymond et al. 1992). In both sessions MEG was recorded. In the first session, after the oddball task, participants also practiced the AB task outside of the MEG scanner so that they could learn about the predictive relationship between T1 and T2.


Session 1: Oddball task

At the start of the first session, we measured MEG while participants performed an oddball task that was highly similar to the AB task. Again, every trial consisted of a sequence of letters in which letters that were targets in the AB task were presented. On every trial, a ‘T1’ (the letter D, V or G) was presented followed by a ‘T2’ (the letter D or K) at both lag 3 and lag 10 and every of these targets was marked by placeholders. All stimuli, including targets, were ‘white’. Every combination of ‘T1’ and ‘T2’ stimuli was equally likely, meaning there was no predictive relationship between the targets. Importantly, participants were not made aware of the presence of the targets. Moreover, because they had not yet seen the AB task, they did not know about the existence of any specific target letters (or predictive relationship between those). The timing of the stimuli and trials was identical to that in the AB task, with the exception that at the end of the letter sequence the ITI (800–1200 ms) started immediately.

Participants were instructed to detect oddball stimuli that occurred on 10% of the trials. An oddball was defined by its grey (luminance: ± 78 cd/m2) instead of white colour. Once an oddball was detected, the participant had to press the index finger button on an MEG-compatible button box as quickly as possible while the task continued. Because, unbeknownst to participants, oddballs were always either a ‘T1’ or ‘T2’ target, they were accompanied by the same placeholders used in the AB task. To make sure participants would focus their attention on the relevant time points in the sequence, they were explicitly instructed that these squares marked the potential temporal positions of oddballs and would help them detect oddballs. Oddball trials were excluded from all analyses. Every participant completed 8 blocks of 96 trials (total 768 trials) of the task. Every block was followed by summary feedback and a short break.


Session 1: Training of the AB task

At the end of the first session, every participant was behaviourally trained on the AB task. First, participants received on-screen instructions in which they were explicitly instructed about the predictive relationship between T1 and T2. Subsequently, they performed 6 blocks of 75 trials (total 300 trials) of the task. The goal of this training session was to familiarize participant with the task before the MEG session and to teach participants the predictive relationship between T1 and T2. We did not analyse the data from this training session.


Session 2: AB task

Participants had to detect targets within a sequence of rapidly presented distractors (92 ms per stimulus). Each stimulus in the sequence was an uppercase letter that was presented at fixation in a monospaced font (‘Courier New’; letter size: ±2.08°). The first target (T1: G, H or V) was presented in ‘green’ at the fifth position of the sequence. In 80% of trials a second target (T2: D or K) was presented as well, either at lag 3 (275 ms after T1 onset; two-third of trials) or at lag 10 (917 ms after T1 onset; one-third of trials). Each distractor letter (all alphabet letters excluding the targets) was presented maximally once per trial. T2 targets and distractors were presented in ‘white’ (luminance: ± 230 cd/m2).

Crucially, the likelihood of each T2 target appearing was conditional on the identity of the T1 stimulus that was previously presented. For every participant, one of the T1 stimuli (e.g. G) predicted that ‘D’ was the most likely T2 target while another T1 (e.g. H) made the exact opposite prediction that ‘K’ was the most likely T2 target. If a T2 was presented, the likely T2 stimulus was shown on 75% of trials. A third T1 stimulus (e.g. V) had no predictive value (neutral condition; 20% of trials), i.e. both T2 stimuli were equally likely to follow T1. All possible mappings of T1 and T2 were used across participants in a counterbalanced fashion, but mappings were fixed within a given participant for the entire experiment. On 20% of trials no T2 stimulus was presented but a random distractor letter was presented instead at either lag 3 or lag 10. Both at the T1-timepoint and the T2-timepoint of a trial, even when a T2 target was omitted, a placeholder consisting of four grey squares (luminance: ± 50 cd/m2; size: 0.62°; midpoint of each square centred at 2.34° horizontally and vertically from fixation) was presented around the target letter. This placeholder provided timing information, cueing participants which time points were relevant in a trial and thereby helping them decide which targets they saw during a trial.

Following a 150 ms blank period at the end of the letter sequence, participants gave their responses with the use of a (MEG-compatible) button box, using the index, middle and ring finger of their right hand. First, they reported the T2 they had seen (3 response options: D, K or none). Subsequently, they were asked to make a forced-choice judgment about the T1 stimulus that was presented (3 response options: G, H or V). A long response timeout duration of 4 s was used, and participants were explicitly instructed to value accuracy over response speed. The inter-trial interval was 800–1200 ms.

Before starting the MEG recordings, participants were briefly reminded about the task instructions (given to them in a previous session, see next paragraph). Every participant completed ∼750 trials (average: 748.7 ± 26.8, minimum: 652; maximum: 803), with the exact number depending on the duration of MEG preparations and the number of breaks a participant needed. At the end of every block of 75 trials, participants received summary feedback about their performance and were provided with the opportunity to take a short break.


Behavioural analyses


Oddball task

Like for the AB task, behavioural data were preprocessed with MATLAB. We computed hit rates (percentage of detected oddballs) and analysed these using JASP (Love et al. 2015). Specifically, we compared the hit rate between trials where the oddball was presented at the T1-timepoint, the lag 3 T2-timepoint or the lag 10 T2-timepoint.


AB task

Behavioural data were preprocessed with in-house MATLAB scripts and subsequently analysed using JASP software (Love et al. 2015). We focused on the effects of lag and expectation on percentage correct T2 visibility, given that the correct T1 target was reported. T2 responses were considered to be correct if a participant entered the target letter that was presented or reported not seeing a letter when none was presented on a T2 absent trials. Since expectations are undefined on T2 absent trials, these trials cannot be used in the main statistical analyses. T2 percentage correct was used in a 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with the factors expectation validity (valid, invalid and neutral) and lag (lag 3, lag 10). Subsequently, we performed posthoc t-tests to directly compare the different levels of expectations within each of the lags.


MEG measurements and preprocessing

Whole-head magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recordings were acquired (sampling rate 1200 Hz) using a 275-channel MEG system with axial gradiometers (VSM/CTF Systems, Coquitlam, BC, Canada), which was located in a magnetically shielded room. Four channels (MLC11, MLC32, MLF62 and MRF66) were disabled in all participants for technical reasons. Head position was monitored and corrected if required using three coils, placed on the nasion and on earplugs in both ears (Stolk et al. 2013). Importantly, at the start of the second MEG session an effort was made to reposition a participants’ head as much as possible in the same location as during the first session by using a template head position saved in the first MEG session. In addition to the MEG, three sets of electrodes (+ground) were used to measure the electrocardiogram and horizontal and vertical eye movements. Finally, an Eyelink 1000 eyetracker (SR Research, Ottawa, Canada; sampling rate 1000 Hz) was used to measure pupil dilation and vertical and horizontal eye movements.

For each session separately, we preprocessed the data with the FieldTrip toolbox for MATLAB (Oostenveld et al. 2011). Data were high-pass filtered at 0.01 Hz to remove slow signal drifts. Additionally, a set of notch filters was applied at 50, 100 and 150 Hz to remove line noise. Subsequently, we cut the data into epochs from −750 to 1500 ms relative to T1 stimulus onset. The data were visually inspected and trials and/or channels with artefacts were deleted (averages session 1: 7.0% of trials, 1.2 channels; averages session 2: 5.4% of trials, 1.1 channels). To remove noise originating from far away external sources, third-order gradient correction using the CTF reference sensors was applied. Independent component analysis was used to identify and remove data components related to eye blinks, eye movements or heartbeats. To get a reliable estimate of which components to delete, each of the components was correlated to the EEG and eyetracker channels. Following the independent component analysis, previously deleted channels were reconstructed using the average of neighbouring channels. Finally, all trials were baseline corrected on the interval 500 ms prior to T1 onset (corresponding to −775 to −275 ms prior to T2 onset).


Decoding analyses and statistics

Prior to the decoding analyses, we applied a sliding window of 50 ms to average the data, thereby smoothing the data in the temporal domain and improving the signal-to-noise ratio. Subsequently, we performed the decoding analyses by using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) decoders with the activity from all MEG-channels as features. In short, as outcome measure, the LDA decoder calculates the distance from a decision boundary on a trial-by-trial basis (full analysis details are available in Mostert et al. 2015). This distance measure can be used as a quantitative measure of the evidence for a certain class in de decoder. In cases where a decoder was trained and tested on the same dataset, a 10-fold cross-validation procedure was implemented in which for each fold the LDA decoder was trained on 90% of the trials and tested on the remaining 10% of trials. To be able to look at the stability of neural representations over time, all decoders were trained at one-time point and then tested on all-time points, resulting in a temporal generalization matrix (time range −250 to 1500 ms relative to T1; see also King and Dehaene 2014a,b). Cluster-based permutation tests with 1000 permutations were used to find the significant positive or negative clusters within the temporal generalization matrices of interest (Maris and Oostenveld 2007). During each permutation, positive and negative clusters were identified independently (each using one-sided P = 0.025 level), and subsequently the t-values within a cluster were summed. We then took the maximum absolute t-value sum as the statistic for the permutation distribution to which observed cluster t-statistics would be compared.

Using these analyses methods, we initially decoded T2 target identity at lag 3 within each of the two tasks. Further decoding analyses were done between-tasks, training the LDA decoder on one task and testing it on the other task. For the main analyses, we used the decoding that was trained on the oddball task and tested it on the AB task data (only trials where T1 was correctly identified), separately for valid and invalid trials. We did not include the neutral condition here because the number of observations in this condition was low (only presented on 20% of trials). A similar analysis was done to compare T2 identity decoding between T2 reported and T2 missed trials. As a control, we repeated all these decoding analyses for T2 targets presented at lag 10, the results of which are reported in the.

Next, we used the decoder trained on the oddball task and tested it on the AB data (T1 correct trials) for T2-absent trials and trials with lag 10 together (in both conditions, no target stimulus was presented at lag 3). Instead of grouping trials based on T2 identity, we grouped trials based on the expected T2 stimulus so that we could investigate the neural representation of sensory expectations. In a final group of analyses, decoders were trained and tested on the AB task (lag 3 and T1 correct trials only), allowing us to investigate the main effects of expectation validity and T2 visibility within the AB task. In addition, we did within-task T2 decoding analyses separately for T2 reported and T2 miss trials. Finally, to get a better view at the decoding results when training and testing on the same time point, we extracted the diagonal from the temporal generalization matrices of a number of analyses. We performed a paired-samples t-tests to each time point of the data after T1 presentation (0–1500 ms) and subsequently applied false discovery rate (FDR) correction.


Results


Behavioural results: oddball task

In the oddball task, we computed the hit rate (percentage of detected oddballs) for each of the time points at which an oddball could be presented. The hit rate was significantly different between these time points (F2,54 = 13.87, P < 0.001; T1 time: 72.49 ± 27.91%; T2 lag 3 time: 74.38 ± 25.74%; T2 lag 10 time: 60.27 ± 27.12%). Follow-up t-tests showed this effect was caused by a lower hit rate for oddballs presented at the latest position in the stream (T1 time vs. T2 lag 10 time: t27 = 3.364, P = 0.002; T2 lag 3 time vs. T2 lag 10 time: t27 = 5.065, P < 0.001), while there was no difference between the other two time points (T1 time vs. T2 lag 3 time: t27 = −0.897, P = 0.378).


Behavioural results: attentional blink task

In, we show percentage correct T2 discrimination for trials on which T1 was correctly identified, separately for short and long lags (T1 accuracy T2 at lag 3: 95.63%, SD = 3.68%; T1 accuracy T2 at lag 10: 95.69%, SD = 3.95%). We observed a clear AB, as indicated by a reduced T2 performance when the time between T1 and T2 was short compared to long (lag 3: 34.57%; lag 10: 62.58%; F1,27 = 61.43, P < 0.001). Importantly, T2 stimuli were more often correctly reported when they were expected (collapsed across lag: expected: 59.44%, unexpected: 39.13%; F2,54=17.37, P < 0.001) and this effect of expectations was different at lag 3 than at lag 10 (interaction lag × validity: F2,54 = 5.97, P = 0.005).

To test whether valid expectations increase, or invalid expectations decrease, T2 reportability, we directly compared valid, invalid and neutral trials at each of the two lags. At lag 3, where T2 most often goes unreported, T2 discrimination performance was higher in the valid (black line; 47.67%) than in the neutral (dark grey line; 30.35%) and invalid (light grey line; 25.68%) conditions (valid–invalid: t27 = 5.49, P < 0.001; valid–neutral: t27 = 4.60, P < 0.001). In the invalid condition performance was lowest, although not significantly lower than performance in the neutral condition (neutral–invalid: t27 = 1.79, P = 0.084). At the long lag, performance was also higher in the valid than invalid condition (valid 71.21%; invalid 52.57%; valid–invalid: t27 = 3.88, P < 0.001) and performance in the neutral condition was in between the other conditions, though closer to the valid condition (neutral: 63.97%; valid–neutral: t27 = 2.04, P = 0.051; neutral–invalid: t27 = 3.18, P = 0.004). Taken together, these results replicate earlier findings that conscious access can be affected by expectations about stimulus likelihood and that these effects are largest at short lags, inside the AB (Meijs et al. 2018). Additionally, at this short lag performance was significantly improved when expectations were valid compared to neutral, while the negative effect of invalid expectations was relatively small. Indeed, the benefit of valid expectations was larger at lag 3 than at lag 10 (valid–neutral lag 3 vs. valid–neutral lag 10: t27 = 3.67, P = 0.001). This suggests that at short lags, when the T2 stimulus is most often missed, the observed expectation effects are likely mostly driven by a benefit from valid expectations, which leads to a higher likelihood of conscious access.

Overall, false-alarms were infrequent, on ∼19% of T2-absent trials subjects reported a target, correct rejections for T2-absent trials: lag 3: 81.52%; lag 10: 79.94% (Aru and Bachmann 2017). Further, if participants reported seeing a target on T2-absent trials, they most often reported the expected target (t27 = 2.52, P = 0.018), demonstrating that participants had indeed learned the predictive relationship between T1 and T2 and used this information for their decisions. Therefore, it may be that the behavioural effect of expectations we observed on T2-present trials is (partly) affected by this response bias. Indeed, a correlation between participants’ response bias, as measured by the percentage of trials they reported the expected letter vs. another letter on T2-absent trials, and their expectation effect, as measured by the difference in performance on valid minus invalid trials, was observed at lag 3 (black dots; lag 3: spearman r = 0.49, P = 0.008; lag 10: spearman r = 0.34, P = 0.078). However, a control analysis where we analysed the percentage of ‘T2 seen’ responses (classifying a response as ‘seen’ regardless of whether this letter was correctly reported) showed comparable effects of expectation (validity effect: F2,54 = 6.06, P = 0.004; interaction lag × validity: F2,54 = 5.13, P = 0.009). Therefore it seems unlikely that response bias can fully explain our behavioural results, because in this control analysis the dependent variable (seen vs. miss) is completely orthogonal to participants’ expectations (D vs. K), ensuring that expectations cannot bias a specific response option. This is further supported by the fact that this outcome measure did not correlate with the response bias participants had on T2-absent trials (grey dots; lag 3: spearman r = −0.09, P = 0.649; lag 10: spearman r = −0.11, P = 0.594). This suggests that the observed expectation effects are present over and above the effects of response bias (note that the pattern of correlations was similar when the outlier subject with a response bias of nearly 100% was removed from the data, lag 3: spearman r = −0.05, P = 0.822; lag 10: spearman r = −0.05, P = 0.807).


Decoding of T2 identity is modulated by stimulus relevance

Multivariate analyses can provide insights in the dynamics of category-specific brain responses, as different neural and cognitive processes may be reflected in dissimilar patterns of temporal generalization (King and Dehaene 2014b). First, we tested the role of stimulus relevance in the processing of the letter stimuli. To do so, we focused on decoding the identity of T2 targets (D vs. K) at lag 3, irrespective of conscious report or expectations. shows the temporal generalization profiles for T2 identity within each of the two tasks, using cross-validation procedures and corrected for multiple comparisons (see Materials and Methods section for details). As can be seen, T2 target identity could reliably be decoded from MEG data in both tasks, as reflected in a typically observed diagonal decoding pattern starting ∼100 ms after T2 onset (Oddball task: P = 0.022; AB task: P < 0.001, permutation tests). This diagonal decoding pattern likely reflects a rapid sequence of distinct neural processes evolving over time (King and Dehaene 2014b; Mostert et al. 2015; Marti and Dehaene 2017). Further, as expected, in the AB task only, decoding performance was not only strong on the diagonal of the temporal generalization matrix, but its profile showed a mixture of a diagonal and a square-shaped pattern and decoding was much more extended in time. Thus, we observed stimulus-specific stable and sustained activation patterns for task-relevant compared to task-irrelevant stimuli. Next, we trained decoders on each of the tasks and subsequently tested them on the data of the other task (between-task decoding) to test for neural similarities and differences between the tasks. This approach solely resulted in significant clusters along the diagonal of the temporal generalization matrices for both analyses, further highlighting a shared neural coding of target identity from ∼100 to 375 ms post T2 onset (Oddball task → AB task: P = 0.013, AB task → Oddball task: P = 0.024). This conclusion is also supported by similar decoding results for T2 stimuli presented at lag 10. Overall, these results show that when stimuli are task-relevant (require a perceptual decision) additional processing steps can be picked up by the classifier and T2 identity is processed in more stable and temporally extended neural representations, as compared to when stimuli are task-irrelevant (Kiebel et al. 2008; Stokes et al. 2009; King and Dehaene 2014b; Mostert et al., 2015; Myers et al. 2017).


Conscious access is related to late and stable stimulus-specific neural representations

Next, we tested how category-specific neural representations relate to conscious report, or the absence thereof, in the AB task. We did so by comparing T2 decoding (D vs. K) at lag 3 for seen T2s vs. missed T2s. To rule out any effect caused by the identity of T1, only trials where T1 was correctly reported were incorporated in these analyses. shows both between-task analyses (Oddball task → AB task) and within-task analyses (AB task → AB task; done separately per condition). In line with prevalent theoretical models of consciousness, such as global workspace theory (Baars 2002) and local recurrence theory (Lamme 2006), early sensory processing of the stimulus was independent of conscious report, as reflected by similar decoding profiles along the diagonal of the temporal generalization matrix for reported and missed T2’s (Oddball task → AB task) (Dehaene et al. 2006; Dehaene and Changeux 2011; King et al. 2016; Fahrenfort et al. 2017). also shows within-task analyses (AB task →AB task) in which T2 identity was decoded based on solely T2 reported or T2 missed trials. In both analyses, significant l decoding of T2 identity around the diagonal was observed (T2 reported trials: P < 0.001, miss trials: P = 0.042). However, when T2 was reported, this decoding pattern was longer-lasting and had a broader spatial profile (more square-shaped instead of diagonal, T2 reported: decoding significant from ∼100 ms to ∼1200 ms post T2-onset; T2 missed: decoding significant from ∼100 ms to ∼410 ms post T2-onset). This suggests that, compared to missed T2’s, the signal was broadcasted higher up the cortical hierarchy (for similar results see Mostert et al. 2015). Please note that the apparent pre-stimulus decoding in should not necessarily be interpreted as evidence for decoding of stimulus-specific T2 activations before the stimulus is presented. This effect most likely relates to decoding of T1, which in the AB task was correlated to T2 identity.

Finally, we aimed to decode reported vs. missed T2’s in the AB task, irrespective of the specific stimulus that was presented (classifier labels: reported vs. missed, target letter is not relevant, P < 0.001). Several interesting aspects of the obtained temporal generalization profile can be noted. First, along the diagonal, decoding was significant already before T2 presentation. Neural activity before stimulus presentation thus predicted later stimulus report, in line with recent reports highlighting pre-stimulus fluctuations in neural activity that correlate with stimulus visibility (e.g. Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. 2004; Mathewson et al. 2009; Iemi et al. 2017). Because this analysis only included T1-correct trials, this pre-stimulus effect cannot easily be explained in terms of differences in T1-performance. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that T1-related processes affected these results, since others have shown that the extent of T1 processing may be different for T2 blink and T2 no-blink trials (Ouimet and Jolicœur 2007; Slagter et al. 2017). The second interesting aspect about this overall visibility effects was that the square-shaped pattern was much stronger and clearer. This stimulus-independent profile is likely related to an amplified P3-like component on T2 reported trials compared to T2 missed trials, which is picked up by the classifier algorithm (see for ERF results) (Sergent et al. 2005; Meijs et al. 2018).


Valid expectations do not enhance early sensory representations of stimulus identity

In our final set of decoding analyses, we aimed to explore the link between neural recordings, expectations and conscious reports. Behaviourally, we observed that valid expectations increased the chance that a stimulus was subsequently reported and to test whether this may relate to the sharpening of sensory representation of T2 identity, decoding performance was compared between trials where participants had a valid or invalid expectation at lag 3 (only T1-correct trials were included). Importantly, only between-task analyses were performed in which the decoder was trained on the oddball task (no T1–T2 predictability) to prevent the decoding being biased by the predictive relationship between T1 and T2 in the first place, which is inherently present in our AB task and difficult to circumvent. Training on the AB task would also incorporate undesirable factors (e.g. conscious access: valid trials are reported more often than invalid trials) into the classifier training.

These decoding analyses revealed no effect of prior knowledge on the sharpening of sensory representations (T2 identity decoding was similar for valid and invalid trials, P > 0.9). Because several studies have shown that the effects of expectation may interact with (or even depend on) attention (Kok et al. 2012; Jiang et al. 2013), we aimed to rule out that the absence of expectation-related sharpening could be attributed to a lack of attention for targets presented at lag 3 (i.e. during the ‘blink’ period). However, similar results were obtained for stimuli presented at lag 10 and hence out of the AB period. Furthermore, we observed the same pattern of results in a control analysis with all the 28 participants that were included in the behavioural analyses. This eliminates the possibility that any absence of a significant effect may be related to the selection of participants. To verify whether there were any general neural effects of expectation validity, we also decoded whether a trial was valid or invalid regardless of T2 identity within the AB task (training and testing within the AB task). This control analysis, while matching the number of seen/unseen trials within each condition (valid vs. invalid), did not reveal significant decoding of validity (all cluster P-values >0.46). A final control analysis in which we trained the classifier on the difference between oddball stimuli and standard stimuli in the oddball task and tested the difference between valid and invalid trials in the AB task did also not reveal any effects of expectation violation (across task classification), but did reveal expectation violation signals in the oddball task itself (see A).

The lack of a decoding difference between valid and invalid trials makes it unlikely that participants’ expectations induced neural ‘perceptual templates’ in the current task design. On valid trials, when participants’ expectation about the upcoming T2 was equal to the T2 that was presented, a decoder trained to distinguish T2 identity in the oddball task should have been able to pick up the representation of the target (expectation) before target presentation (target and expectation matched). Similarly, on invalid trials one would have expected inverse decoding, because participant’s expectation was opposite to the T2 stimulus that was later presented (target and expectation mismatched; Kok et al. 2017). To fully rule out that we may have missed expectation-induced sharpening, we performed a final analysis in which we grouped trials based on the expected T2 stimulus instead of the actually presented T2 stimulus. Only T2-absent and lag 10 trials were used, so no T2 stimulus was ever presented at lag 3 in order to prevent any contamination of the results by actual stimuli. But again we did not observe the instigation of expectation-related perceptual templates (all P > 0.221).


Discussion

In this report, we investigated the relationship between expectations and conscious access and the role of stimulus relevance on stimulus-specific neural representations. Using an AB paradigm in which the identity of T1 predicted the likelihood of the T2, we found that T2 stimuli confirming T1-induced expectations are more likely to be consciously reported than T2 stimuli that violate these expectations. This is in line with studies that have shown that the speed (Chang et al. 2015; Pinto et al. 2015; De Loof et al. 2016) and accuracy (Stein and Peelen 2015; Meijs et al. 2018) of stimulus detection is strongly influenced by expectations. While control analyses in our experiment ruled out that response biases fully explain our effect, future experiments may benefit from the use of other measures, e.g. by asking participants to rate the subjective strength of the targets, such as done with the Perceptual Awareness Scale (Overgaard et al. 2006). Interestingly, by including neutral expectation trials we showed that the effect of expectations was mainly driven by a performance benefit for valid expectations, at least in the AB interval (at short lags) (see also Pinto et al. 2015). Thus, at the time that targets are often missed, conscious access becomes more likely when expectations are confirmed (valid) compared to when they were absent or invalidated.

We have also presented a series of multivariate decoding analyses, in which we first showed that it was possible to reliably decode the identity of a target letter from MEG data, both when the identity of this letter was task-irrelevant in an oddball task and when it was task-relevant and actively searched for in an AB task. Furthermore, the combination of both within- and between-task decoding analyses revealed that stimulus-specific neural representations underlying the early stages of information processing (on-diagonal generalization) were highly similar for both tasks and independent of stimulus relevance and the outcome of the perceptual decision (whether T2’s were reported or missed in the AB task; Mostert et al. 2015; King et al. 2016). Similar early decoding profiles were observed for (i) task-irrelevant letters in the oddball task, (ii) task-relevant, but missed T2’s in the AB task and (iii) task-relevant and reported T2’s in the AB task. These results suggest that early stimulus-specific neural processing stages are not modulated by either attention to the stimulus dimension [stimulus (task) relevance] nor conscious access to the target identity (report), in line with previous findings (Fahrenfort et al. 2017). The absence of decoding at later time points when T2 was task-irrelevant furthermore suggests that the representation of target letter identity is not ‘broadcasted’ to higher levels of the cortical hierarchy when this feature is task-irrelevant (Marti and Dehaene 2017). Usually, it is assumed that compared to nonconscious perception, conscious report is related to widespread neural activity (up to frontal areas) and more stable neural representations (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Dehaene et al. 2006; Dehaene and Changeux 2011; Schurger et al. 2015). Indeed we observed that within the AB task, when targets were task-relevant, attended and reported, T2 identity could be decoded for a longer time frames and was more stable, reflected in a square-shaped decoding profile (Ress et al. 2000; Jehee et al. 2011; Mostert et al. 2015; King et al. 2016; Marti and Dehaene 2017; van Vugt et al. 2018). Additionally, we observed a non-specific (regardless of T2 identity or expectations) difference between T2 reported and missed trials, of which the late sustained part presumably corresponds to previously observed P3 modulations related to conscious report (Kranczioch et al. 2003; Sergent et al. 2005; Meijs et al. 2018) and task relevance (Pitts et al. 2014; et al.). We also observed that fluctuations in neural activity (or overall ‘brain state’) before T2 presentation influenced whether or not the stimulus was later reported, as has been recently demonstrated by several others using at threshold or backward masking tasks (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. 2004; Busch et al. 2009; Mathewson et al. 2009; Pincham and Szucs 2012; de Gee et al. 2014; Petro and Keil 2015; Iemi et al. 2017). These fluctuations may reflect differences in T1 processing (Slagter et al. 2017).

Next, in order to explain the behavioural effects of expectations on conscious access, we looked at the neural representations of T2 identity conditioned on the validity of single-trial expectations. We hypothesized that the early neural representation of validly expected stimuli would be ‘sharpened’, and that this improvement in improved stimulus representation would relate to enhanced stimulus report (Kok et al. 2012; Cheadle et al. 2015). However, we did not observe this effect. Moreover, no evidence for expectation-induced pre-stimulus perceptual templates was observed, although these effects have been recently reported in a different task context (Kok et al. 2017). One possible explanation for this discrepancy in findings is that it may take longer than 300 ms to encode T1 and translate the T1-prediction into a sensory representation. Nevertheless, in our study, the influence of expectations on conscious report was not reflected in modulations of sensory representations prior to T2 presentation or at early stages in the processing hierarchy (for a similar conclusions in a different paradigm see e.g. Rungratsameetaweemana et al. 2018; Alilovic et al. 2019; Weaver et al. 2019). It could be that expectations can influence perception at multiple levels of the cortical hierarchy, with different processes being affected depending on the type of target stimuli or expectations being involved. In our AB paradigm, participants learned conditional relationships between two letter stimuli. Consequently, the expectations in our task were most likely represented at a higher level of the cortical hierarchy (i.e. semantic) as compared to the rather low-level perceptual expectations in earlier studies (Kok et al. 2012). As a consequence, the early sensory representation of the targets that we pick up based on the oddball task may not have been optimal for detecting expectation-based modulations of T2 processing. Therefore, the ‘format’ in which the expectations were represented may simply have been different (e.g. verbally or motor code) than that of the incoming visual information and hence interactive effects may not have been visible at the sensory level (Bang and Rahnev 2017; Rungratsameetaweemana et al. 2018; Rungratsameetaweemana and Serences 2019). Future research would benefit from using tasks that can capture the full stimulus processing hierarchy involved in processing the relevant stimuli within the experimental task (sensory, semantic, decision).

In line with a recent study (Rungratsameetaweemana et al. 2018), we did not find any reliable time-locked decoding effects that we could relate to the behavioural benefits of expectations, suggesting it may be relatively subtle and hard to detect (see also Meijs et al. 2018). Expectations may only affect small populations of neurons and such effect may be hard to detect using analyses based on data from multiple sources (which is the case here because analyses were performed on the sensor level). Such effects may be more readily picked up with analyses in the source domain. Alternatively, there are other possible implementations of expectations, such as the modulation of the onset of components related to conscious perception (Melloni et al. 2011). Other potentially interesting signatures are the power and/or phase of alpha oscillations because a number of studies have shown that low pre-stimulus alpha power is predictive of subsequent conscious stimulus perception (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. 2004; Busch et al. 2009; Mathewson et al. 2009; de Lange et al. 2013; Sherman et al. 2016; Benwell et al. 2017; Iemi et al. 2017). Furthermore, it has been shown that expectations lead to changes in pre-stimulus alpha in a way that predicts stimulus visibility (Mayer et al. 2016). Future studies are required to unravel the effect of expectations on conscious access in the frequency domain.

A number of conclusions can be drawn from this study. First, we have shown that the neural representation of letters presented during rapid serial visual presentation can be reliably decoded from neural activity as measured by MEG. While early, sensory representations of letters could be decoded regardless of the behavioural state of the subject, later and more stable multivariate activity patterns were dependent on top-down modulations by task relevance, attention and conscious report. Second, we have shown that valid expectations enhance the likelihood of visual target detection but we did not find evidence that this was due to increased ‘sharpness’ of the relevant sensory representations.


Perceptual awareness and active inference

Thomas Parr, Andrew W Corcoran, Karl J Friston, Jakob Hohwy — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6734140, CC BY 4.0.

Perceptual awareness depends upon the way in which we engage with our sensorium. This notion is central to active inference, a theoretical framework that treats perception and action as inferential processes. This variational perspective on cognition formalizes the notion of perception as hypothesis testing and treats actions as experiments that are designed (in part) to gather evidence for or against alternative hypotheses. The common treatment of perception and action affords a useful interpretation of certain perceptual phenomena whose active component is often not acknowledged. In this article, we start by considering Troxler fading – the dissipation of a peripheral percept during maintenance of fixation, and its recovery during free (saccadic) exploration. This offers an important example of the failure to maintain a percept without actively interrogating a visual scene. We argue that this may be understood in terms of the accumulation of uncertainty about a hypothesized stimulus when free exploration is disrupted by experimental instructions or pathology. Once we take this view, we can generalize the idea of using bodily (oculomotor) action to resolve uncertainty to include the use of mental (attentional) actions for the same purpose. This affords a useful way to think about binocular rivalry paradigms, in which perceptual changes need not be associated with an overt movement.


Introduction

Bayesian accounts of brain function (Knill and Pouget 2004; Doya 2007; De Ridder et al. 2014) rely upon the idea that the brain utilizes an internal generative model (Von Helmholtz 1867) of its environment to make predictions about incoming sensory data, and that it adjusts this model when these predictions are not fulfilled (Rao and Ballard 1999; Friston and Kiebel 2009). This view formalizes the notion of perception as hypothesis testing (Gregory 1980) and facilitates the extension of this to the metaphor of the brain as a scientist who actively performs experiments (actions) to disambiguate between competing models of the world (Friston et al. 2015). Although this perspective has been successful in understanding a range of behavioural, anatomical and neurophysiological findings (Friston et al. 2017a; Parr and Friston 2018), some phenomena appear at odds with the idea that perception is inference. Here, we focus upon two such phenomena in which percepts appear to deviate from what we might intuitively expect from optimal inference. Specifically, both involve the perception of change over time, despite static sensory input. These include Troxler fading, in which fixation in the centre of an unchanging stimulus is associated with the percept of fading of peripheral stimuli (Troxler 1804); and perceptual (e.g. binocular) rivalry, in which awareness alternates between two distinct percepts. We argue that these percepts can be framed as optimal inferences [in line with the complete class theorems (Wald 1947)] and that their apparent sub-optimality affords an opportunity to explore the sorts of prior beliefs that are necessary to make these Bayes optimal [Bayes optimality is quantified in terms of Bayesian model evidence (i.e. how probable data are under a given model). This is the quantity approximated by negative free energy. Note that, because free energy is a functional of prior beliefs, the behaviour that maximizes model evidence will differ depending upon those beliefs].

This sort of approach has been employed with great success to aid understanding our susceptibility to a range of visual illusions (Geisler and Kersten 2002; Weiss et al. 2002; Brown and Friston 2012; Brown et al. 2013). In what follows, we make use of similar ideas but place a special emphasis upon active engagement with the sensorium. The importance of action in perception is simply demonstrated in, which shows a stimulus of the sort that can induce Troxler fading. On extended fixation of the central cross, the colours in the periphery appear to fade away. The colours immediately re-appear upon resumption of normal exploratory eye movements. This simple example illustrates the need to consider the active inferential processes that underwrite perceptual awareness. In the following sections, we first provide a brief overview of the generic aspects of active inference and then turn to the specific generative model used to illustrate the importance of action in perception; under beliefs that the world may change in an unpredictable way. We then apply the conclusions drawn from these simulations to try to explain perceptual (binocular) rivalry. A comprehensive evaluation of all previous empirical and experimental data is beyond the scope of the present paper, which presents a starting point for further research. Ultimately, the theoretical accounts proposed here represent hypotheses as to the generative models and, implicitly, computational mechanisms that underwrite these perceptual phenomena. As such, they must be answerable to empirical data. To facilitate this, we highlight some of the predictions that arise from this approach that we hope to test through psychophysical and neuroimaging experiments.


Active Inference

The ideas outlined in the introduction may be formalized by appealing to active inference. This is a theoretical perspective on brain function that frames action and perception as ‘self-evidencing’ (Hohwy 2016) or free energy minimizing processes. Another way of putting this is that these are inferential processes, with perception representing inferences about the causes of sensory data, and action planning as a process of inference about ‘what I am going to do next’. A simple way to motivate this perspective is to start from the idea that actions (u) change the external world such that some function of sensory observations (o) is optimized (Friston 2013): This premise is essentially a restatement of the principle of homeostasis, as it says that actions correct deviations in observed values (where observations encompass both external and internal environments), returning them to their optimum values. It also underwrites a range of theoretical accounts of behaviour, where creatures are assumed to maximize the ‘value’ or ‘utility’ of the data they observe. Given that this function of observations may be maximized, we can treat this as an un-normalized log probability (often referred to as ‘model evidence’): It is this expression that justifies the self-evidencing perspective, as the drive to optimize sensations has been re-expressed as a drive to seek those sensory data that afford greater evidence to one’s model of the world. Evidence is used here in the technical sense, as a marginal likelihood (probability of data under a model). This is made explicit in the second line of, in which the evidence is given as the marginal of a distribution that accounts for the generation of observations by hidden states (s) of the world, and the policy (course of action) pursued (π) by the creature in question. From a variational perspective [variational methods originated in physics as a way of turning a difficult integration problem into an optimization problem Feynman, R. P. (1998). In the context of variational inference, this is used to convert the problem of summing over all unknown variables into an optimization of a quantity called free energy (in statistics and machine learning, negative free energy is sometimes referred to as the evidence lower bound or ‘ELBO’)] we can re-write in terms of a free energy functional (F) (Dayan et al. 1995; Beal 2003; Friston et al. 2010):

This equation says that when our beliefs (Q) approximate the (posterior) probability of states and policies (i.e. sequences of actions) given sensory data (observations), minimizing free energy approximates maximization of model evidence. This emphasizes the (approximately) Bayesian inferential processes implicated in self-evidencing. In the following, we equate perception with optimization of beliefs about states and planning with optimization of beliefs about policies. These rest upon a generative model of the form shown in, in which states cause observations, and themselves are caused by states at previous times, depending upon the policy pursued. Appealing to the same ideas outlined in this section, we set the prior belief about policies such that those policies with the smallest expected free energy (G) are considered more probable (Friston et al. 2017b,c). In, the expected free energy is expressed in two ways. The first emphasizes the similarity between it and the free energy of. The second splits this into three terms with distinct interpretations. Term 1 expresses the ambiguity of a state-outcome mapping. The greater this term, the lower the fidelity of this mapping. Term 2 expresses the uncertainty in predicting the outcome that would be observed conditioned upon the policy (i.e. the entropy of posterior predictive beliefs). Together, terms 1 and 2 express the amount of resolvable uncertainty associated with a policy (Lindley 1956). Term 3 may be thought of as encoding preferences about the sorts of outcomes that will be sought (Friston and Ao 2012). In summary, the first two terms of the expected free energy favour the performance of experiments to disambiguate between alternative hypotheses about the world, whereas the final term biases this towards seeking out those data consistent with one’s favoured hypothesis. The novel aspects of the treatment in this article rest upon this (expected free energy) functional. As we will see later, it is this that drives the (mental or motoric) active selection of data to resolve the uncertainty that underwrites visual sampling (and precludes stimulus fading) and that gives rise to the perceptual transitions in binocular rivalry. This builds upon previous accounts of these phenomena that focus on passive perceptual processing in the presence of ambiguous data.

In addition to showing the form of P, the generative model, illustrates how a neuronal network could make inferences about this generative model through gradient descents on the variational free energy, while selecting policies that minimize the expected free energy (Friston et al. 2017a, d).


Action in Perception

To illustrate the importance of action in perception (Martinez-Conde et al. 2004; Zimmermann and Lappe 2016; Parr and Friston 2017a; Bruineberg et al. 2018), we constructed a generative model of the sort that might be used by the brain in visual scene construction (Mirza et al. 2016). Similar models have been validated empirically in human subjects (Mirza et al. 2018). The form of the model is shown in. This comprises five types of hidden state: four that indicate the colour shown in each quadrant, and one that represents fixation location. As shown in the lower part of the figure, when fixating on the lower left quadrant (left image), the visual outcome is determined by an identity (i.e. deterministic one-to-one) mapping from the hidden state indicating the colour in this location (i.e. the hidden states map directly to their associated outcomes). On performing a saccade to the lower right quadrant (right image), the visual outcome is determined by an identity mapping from the hidden state representing the lower right quadrant (A). This structure means that the subject may choose which of the hidden states to interrogate by selecting an eye movement. The eye movements depend upon which transition matrix (B) is selected. The matrix shown in the centre at the upper part of the image illustrates the form that this takes when policy 4 is selected. Whichever position is initially fixated (columns), there is a probability of 1 that location 4 is fixated at the next time-step (rows). This is illustrated in the figure by the move from the lower left to the lower right quadrant.

The transitions associated with the stimuli at each location are set to be identity matrices. This ensures that the stimulus is static throughout time. In the generative model (the beliefs the brain has about how the data were generated), we equip these matrices with a precision (inverse temperature) (ω) that permits the possibility that the stimuli may change from moment to moment. A similar parameterization is used for the likelihoods (with precision ζ). The smaller these precisions are, the more uncertain the associated probabilities. The C-matrix expresses preferences over outcomes, here set to be uniform (i.e. no outcome is preferable relative to any other). Beliefs about initial states (D) are the same for the generative model, and the process generating the simulated data. These ensure the initial states of each stimulus are known, and that the initial fixation location is at the fixation cross. The idea was to initialize with the beliefs we might have following free exploration, so that the start of the simulation corresponds to the point at which we have been asked to fixate or to continue exploring. This makes very little difference for the latter, where similarly confident beliefs are maintained throughout. However, had we started with completely uncertain beliefs at the point of the instruction to maintain fixation, we would have had no precise percept to fade away. Although our synthetic subjects start with veridical prior beliefs, the uncertainty in the transitions (1/ω) ensures that, in the absence of new data, the uncertainty associated with these beliefs will increase with time since the start of the trial [c.f. ‘distrusting the present’ (Hohwy et al. 2016)].

Crucially, because the likelihood is equivalently precise for each quadrant, and because the preferences are uniform, the only component of the expected free energy that varies between saccades to each location is the entropy of posterior predictive beliefs [term 2 in]. This drives the behaviour illustrated in. Inspection of the lower plots that illustrate beliefs throughout the trial reveals that on saccadic fixation (highlighted in red), there is minimal uncertainty. Over successive time-steps, the uncertainty accumulates, leading to more grey (probabilities between 0 and 1) in the belief plots. At each time, the maximally uncertain location is selected for the next saccade in accordance with term 2 in. Another way of looking at this is that selection of policies to minimize expected free energy naturally gives rise to an ‘inhibition of return’ phenomenon (Posner et al. 1985; Klein 2000), whereby recently fixated locations lose their salience (Parr and Friston 2019) relative to those locations in which something might have changed (Von Helmholtz 1867; Hohwy 2012).

illustrates what happens when we instruct our simulated participant to maintain fixation on the central cross. This instruction is given by increasing the preference for seeing the cross over all other possible outcomes (encoded in C). The lack of exploratory eye movements here means that the accumulating uncertainty cannot be counteracted, and beliefs about the stimuli rapidly become uniform. This is illustrated in the upper plot as a fading of the peripheral stimuli. Under this model, the dissipation of the percept can be seen as compliance with Jaynes’ maximum entropy principle (Jaynes 1957), which says that the best inference is that which has the maximum Shannon entropy (uncertainty) under the constraints imposed by observations. This imperative is formalized in free energy minimization, as the free energy may be expressed in terms of an ‘energy’ minus an ‘entropy’ [third line of]. As data contributes only to the ‘energy’ term, an inability to seek out new data favours the ‘entropy’ term.

shows a more selective deficit, in which we have introduced a bias towards rightward saccades. This device has previously been used to replicate the deficits of exploratory eye movements associated with visual neglect (Parr and Friston 2017b). Neglect is a neuropsychological syndrome, normally following pathological insult to the right cerebral hemisphere, characterized by an impaired awareness of stimuli on the left side of space (Halligan and Marshall 1998). This condition is of great importance to the issue of action in perception, as a behavioural characteristic of neglect is a diminished frequency of saccades to the left (Husain et al. 2001; Fruhmann Berger et al. 2008; Karnath and Rorden 2012). The simulations here illustrate a plausible interaction between these behavioural and perceptual aspects of neglect, as uncertainty accumulates in those regions that are not fixated.

illustrates an important feature of the model we have described. This shows the accumulation of uncertainty for the simulation of in terms of the Shannon entropy of these beliefs over time. As beliefs about the precision of transitions increases, the time for the entropy to reach its maximum is increased. If we equate the maximum entropy with the point at which the image fades, it should be possible to estimate, from experimental data, the precision a given individual ascribes to transitions. This makes a strong empirical prediction, in that the time taken for the image to fade should be inversely related to measures of volatility (the imprecision of dynamics) that can be estimated through other experimental paradigms (Mathys et al. 2014; Marshall et al. 2016; Lawson et al. 2017). Given the association between noradrenergic signalling and precision, it may also be possible to estimate these parameters from pupillary data (Koss 1986) on an individual basis (Vincent et al. 2019). This additionally predicts that pharmacological manipulation of catecholamine signalling would systematically change the time until an image fades. The decay of precise posterior beliefs over time rests upon (beliefs about) the changeability of the environment (Hohwy et al. 2016) or, more exactly, the precision of the transition probabilities that lead from one state to the next. This resonates with the use of ‘fatigue’ terms in previous models of binocular rivalry (Dayan 1998). However, while this was previously incorporated into the inference dynamics explicitly, we find that the same sort of decay emerges naturally from a generative model that entails stochastic transitions. In the next section, we translate the key features of the model used above to the setting of binocular rivalry.

A common explanation for Troxler fading is that cells in the peripheral retina fatigue (or ‘adapt’) on sustained activation (Martinez-Conde et al. 2004). Unless we assume perceptual awareness arises directly from the retinal activity, this explanation is highly consistent with the explanation on offer here. It implies that, during sustained fixation, little precise information from outside the fovea is propagated to the brain. However, it is well known that the precision of data from the peripheral retina is limited even in free visual foraging. Our experience of a visual scene is typically thought of as an internally generated percept [or inference (Von Helmholtz 1867)], informed by the spatially limited data obtained from sequences of fixations. The implication here is that the absence of precise data should not lead to an imprecise inference about a previously observed stimulus, unless the generative model used to make these inferences allows for stochastic dynamics that ensure uncertainty accumulates over time. Following this line of reasoning, evidence in favour of cortical involvement in these processes is unsurprizing (Lleras and Moore 2001; Hsieh and Tse 2006; Kanai et al. 2008).


Attention as Action

In this section, we move from Troxler fading, in which overt actions are crucial in maintaining a percept, to binocular rivalry, in which no overt action takes place. This is the same move that motivates the premotor theory of attention (Rizzolatti et al. 1987). Our aim is to show that exactly the same principles that give rise to Troxler fading also offer a plausible account of rivalry.

Binocular rivalry occurs in the presence of data that could be explained by one of two (or more) hypotheses (Brascamp et al. 2018). A common way to induce this is to present different images to each eye. If we take the view that the brain is a passive recipient of sensory data, we might expect the resulting percept to be some blend of these explanations (Clark 2018), as it is impossible to disambiguate between these with any degree of certainty. However, the resulting percept actually alternates between the two hypotheses. Although this phenomenon is difficult to account for from a ‘Bayesian brain’ perspective, it becomes much simpler once we incorporate action. This is because pursuing an action forces us to commit to interrogating one dimension (factor) of a hypothesis at a time (Hohwy 2013), just as in the Troxler fading example above. In that case, the spatial configuration of stimuli enforced the constraint that only one stimulus could be fixated at any one time. However, beliefs about the changeability of the world drove alternations in which location was fixated at any one time. Here, we generalize this to the notion of an attentional (mental) action (Limanowski and Friston 2018) directed to one set of features or another. In other words, attention may be employed to resolve uncertainty about the presence or absence of one sort of stimulus or the presence or absence of another. These can be seen as two alternative dimensions in a hypothesis space, as both could be present, both absent, or one present and the other absent. We appeal to the same idea that the world is changeable, such that those states informed by unattended features rapidly accumulate uncertainty (and consequently epistemic value), ensuring an alternation of attention. This is highly consistent with accounts of rivalry as an attentional phenomenon (Leopold and Logothetis 1999; Zhang et al. 2011). It also echoes previous ideas concerning the accumulation of uncertainty for the suppressed stimulus (Hohwy et al. 2008), but supplements this idea with an appeal to the accumulation of epistemic value this entails.

The generative model used for this section has the same Markov Decision Process form as that of the previous section. There are two outcome modalities: the presence or absence of visual data consistent with the letter ‘L’, and the presence or absence of visual data consistent with an ‘R’. In the simulated environment (generative process), these are generated by two hidden state factors through identity mappings. The generative model (our synthetic subject’s beliefs about the environment) is additionally equipped with an attentional state, which plays a similar role to that of the fixation location in the previous section. Unlike the fixation location, this has no influence over the data that are actually available to the subject. Instead, it modulates their beliefs about the fidelity (precision) of the mapping from the ‘R’ state to the ‘R’ outcome, and from the ‘L’ state to the ‘L’ outcome. When attending to ‘R’, the ‘L’ outcome is assumed to be randomly (imprecisely) generated and is uninformative about the ‘L’ state, and vice versa when attending to ‘L’. As before, the ambiguity associated with each attentional policy is equivalent when summed overall outcomes. This means that the drive to select a given policy is determined by the predictive entropy, or ‘how uncertain am I about what I would see if I attended to that?’ Note that this generative model does not preclude an inference that both stimuli are present simultaneously. However, it would be relatively simple to incorporate inferences about the location of each stimulus in space, where the prior probability that they occupy the same location is zero.

shows the result of simulating this paradigm, using the same format to that of. Here, we present both an ‘R’ and an ‘L’ outcome. These could be presented to each eye independently, as in binocular rivalry paradigms. The alternation of the percept in the presence of static data illustrates the importance of internally generated dynamics in perception. Here, these dynamics emerge from the imperative to minimize expected free energy, under the prior belief that the world is volatile. shows the influence of various manipulations to the generative model on belief updating to provide intuition for its performance. The first is to change beliefs about the precision of transitions. This illustrates the importance of beliefs about the volatility of the world, as the slower rate of uncertainty accumulation under beliefs that transitions are static diminishes susceptibility to perceptual alternation. This additionally reinforces existing theories that argue for the importance of generative models about changing environments for binocular rivalry (Hohwy et al. 2008), and with those generative models that incorporate explicit decay terms (Dayan 1998) that implicitly model this change.

An increasing susceptibility to rivalry as expected environmental dynamics become less precise predicts that those psychopathologies that are associated with an impaired capacity to estimate volatility, such as schizophrenia and autism (Lawson et al. 2017; Palmer et al. 2017), should lead to more dramatic rivalrous percepts. These changes would not be seen in the frequency of perceptual alternation [although such changes have been reported (Robertson et al. 2013; Xiao et al. 2018)], but in the difference between the percept before and after a perceptual switch. The differences in the amount of belief updating at the time of a perceptual switch might manifest, and be measurable, using electroencephalography. For detailed accounts of the hypothesized relationship between electrophysiological measures and the belief updating described by active inference, please see Friston et al. (2017a, d). An important caveat is that there may be additional attentional deficits in conditions such as autism (Lawson et al. 2014; Palmer et al. 2015), which could confound this line of investigation and explain the mixed results in this field (Wykes et al. 2018). For example, autism has been associated with a failure of selective attention, or the capacity to attend away from irrelevant information. A failure to down-weight the gain of the non-attended stimulus in our simulated paradigm would eliminate any rivalrous phenomena, as the ability to selectively engage attention in an adaptive way underwrites the effects we have demonstrated. This failure of selective attention might counteract any increased susceptibility due to over-estimated volatility in the context of autism. An alternative to relying upon psychopathology would be to appeal to individual differences. The prediction here is that the amount of belief updating required following an attentional switch should be inversely related to the time taken for stimuli to fade in a Troxler paradigm.

The second manipulation, shown in, is an increase in the likelihood precision ascribed to one outcome modality compared with the other. In this example, we set the ‘L’ outcome to be less ambiguous than the ‘R’ outcome. This replicates a covert attentional (Rizzolatti et al. 1987; Sheliga et al. 1994) manifestation of the ‘Streetlight’ effect (Demirdjian et al. 2005), in which the superior quality of information afforded by attending to ‘L’ (or searching for one’s keys underneath a streetlight on an otherwise dark street) renders this an epistemically valuable policy to pursue. As such, perceptual switching is eliminated in favour of attention to the less ambiguous modality. This may be seen as analogous to the effect of altering the contrast of the image presented to one eye, which increases the perceptual dominance of the less ambiguous stimulus (c.f. Levelt 1965). A more extreme (but more common) example would be that of presenting the same image to both eyes such that there is no precise information about one hypothesis (that associated with the stimulus not presented), and nothing to be gained by attending to its associated features.

An interesting phenomenon that speaks to the attentional aspect of binocular rivalry is the slowing of transitions when attention is drawn away from the stimuli (Paffen et al. 2006; Alais et al. 2010). Under the framework employed here, this implies the addition of a third attentional policy. This would lead to a distribution of the time spent in each attentional focus among three (as opposed to two) alternatives, such that the frequency of selecting attention to ‘R’ or ‘L’ decreases. This implies a decrease in the frequency at which a percept transitions to ‘R’ or ‘L’.

illustrates an important point concerning the timing of perceptual switches. Under the idealized simulations in, these switches happen four times per second (i.e. on a theta cycle). This is consistent with evidence that such transitions are locked to this cycle (Doesburg et al. 2009). However, it is important to note that perceptual switches do not necessarily occur every 250 ms. By decreasing both likelihood precisions (e.g. by changing the stimulus contrast), but by very subtly different amounts, we can break the symmetry between the two stimuli that leads to the consistent and regular alternation of, to get the more irregular pattern of. Note that this still involves switches that are locked to the theta cycle, but that a switch does not necessarily occur at every cycle.

The frequency of perceptual transitions has been studied extensively in relation to different experimental factors and clinical conditions (Robertson et al. 2013; Wykes et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2018). However, the model presented here does not make any strong predictions concerning these. Although intuitively it might seem that decreased precision in beliefs about transitions would lead to an increased rate of alternation (and would if the sensory data really were alternating), it instead leads to faster accumulation of uncertainty about the suppressed stimulus. Differences in the rate of alternation between different sorts of stimuli could be explained through an appeal to deep temporal generative models (Kiebel et al. 2009; Friston et al. 2017d) that include a hierarchy of temporal scales. As the hierarchy is ascended, time-courses tend to be extended, such that slowly varying representations are housed at the highest levels (Hasson et al. 2008; Murray et al. 2014). This is important for processes such as working memory (Parr and Friston 2017d), which involve the maintenance of a representation over a time-period that exceeds that of the stimulus presentation (Funahashi et al. 1989). In the present context, this also means that the level at which covert attention is deployed in a generative model will influence the frequency with which the stimulus appears to alternate. For natural visual images used in rivalry paradigms, there will be several hierarchical levels in play (Yuille and Kersten 2006). Given that conditions such as autism are associated with an altered balance between prior and likelihood precision, the influence of each hierarchical level on its adjacent levels is altered. Excessive precision ascribed to lower (faster) levels of the hierarchy might then mean a greater rate of perceptual alteration than when this precision is greater at higher (slower) levels. This predicts that functional imaging of rivalry would reveal greater involvement of lower-level sensory cortical regions in individuals with a faster rate of perceptual alternation, and of higher-order sensory or association cortices in those exhibiting slower rates of alternation. This must be nuanced a little by considering the relative precisions between levels, as a low precision linking a higher to a lower level manifests as a weak (empirical) prior for the lower level, and a relatively high precision ascribed to ascending input to the lower level. In this scenario, there is a form of functional disconnection between the two levels that could lead to increased activity in the lower region without driving changes in the percept at higher levels. This predicts the opposite of the above. These opposing predictions might provide the means to disambiguate between excessive precision ascribed to a likelihood distribution and insufficient precision associated with a prior distribution.

The model used to generate these simulations is formulated in discrete time, so it is difficult to use this to make any definitive statements about the sorts of distributions we might expect for the associated (continuous) dominance times. An interesting next step in accommodating these sorts of data would be to specify a generative model that generates these data from our simulation results. This could be done relatively simply by starting from an assumed duration for a discrete time-step, and adding noise to this. Naively, we might consider treating our assumed duration as the mode of a Gaussian distribution and adding normally distributed noise. However, the problem with this is that it implies a finite probability for a negative dominance time. A simple solution to this is to assume that the distribution of the logarithm of dominance times is normally distributed. When exponentiated, the resulting distribution will preclude negative dominance times and would have a leptokurtic (heavy-tailed) form consistent with empirical characterizations of these distributions (Levelt 1966; Levelt 1967).


Discussion

In the above, we simulated two paradigms that pose difficulties for passive Bayesian accounts of brain function. Through simulations of Troxler fading and binocular rivalry, we demonstrated how appealing to (covert and overt) active inferential processes renders these counterintuitive perceptual phenomena emergent properties of variational inference. To explain these processes, we appealed to the idea of a generative model that makes predictions about sensory data, and that can be used to explain incoming data in terms of their causes. The generative models used above combine two key features. The first is that action (whether skeletomotor or mental) may be used to forage for the data that best resolves uncertainty about a scene. The second feature is a prior belief that the world is not deterministic, but changes over time with a certain probability. Together, these ensure the accumulation of uncertainty about unattended stimuli that are balanced by sequential sampling to resolve this uncertainty. By using the same features to account for multiple perceptual phenomena, we not only comply with Occam’s razor but advance empirically testable hypotheses about the relationship between these paradigms. In brief, those individuals who report a longer time until the stimuli have faded in a Troxler paradigm should exhibit less belief updating (and its associated electrophysiological manifestations) at perceptual transitions in a binocular rivalry paradigm.

A possible objection to these ideas comes from experiments based upon retinal image stabilization. These attempt to maintain an image in exactly the same place on the retina, ensuring the image is always visible in the same retinotopic location and is invariant to eye movements. Although always within the field of view, these images appear to fade over time (Yarbus 1960). The idea that repeated fixations are required to maintain a percept of a (potentially) volatile stimulus appears to contrast with this finding. The apparent contradiction here may be resolved by appealing back to the idea of perceptions as hypotheses (Gregory 1980). This perspective says that we do not perceive the visual data our retina receives, but the inferences drawn from these data. If something is stabilized relative to the retina, then the sensory data it causes are invariant to hypotheses about the external causes of visual data, and the (saccadic) experiments used to resolve uncertainty about these hypotheses (Rozhkova and Nikolaev 2015). As such they cannot be used to disambiguate between perceptual hypotheses. A related interpretation of this phenomenon appeals to the idea that it is itself an example of binocular rivalry. Under this view, there is always a greater potential information gain by attending away from the fixed image, and to the stimuli visible using the other eye instead. This would reproduce the pattern of, where the uninformative stimulus rapidly fades. This is highly consistent with the failure to elicit fading when the same image is stabilized for both eyes (Rozhkova et al. 1982).

Another possible objection to the model used for the Troxler fading example is that an eye movement, no matter where it is to, might yield information about all of the stimuli. This could be motivated in terms of the magnocellular signal arising from the periphery of the retina (Livingstone and Hubel 1988; Zeki and Shipp 1988; Zeki and Shipp 1989; Nealey and Maunsell 1994). Cells contributing to these pathways respond to high-frequency temporal information, so it could be argued that any action will induce high-frequency temporal changes in the retinal periphery that would provide information about all of the stimuli. If this is true, this does not detract from the notion that performing eye movements provides uncertainty resolving information. It simply suggests that there is less specificity in which eye movement is performed. However, there are good reasons to think that the specific eye movements are important. First, the peripheral retina and magnocellular system have very low colour sensitivity. As long as the luminance of the stimuli is matched to the background, the parvocellular pathways originating from the fovea should be much more important (Bachy and Zaidi 2014). Second, saccadic suppression (Bridgeman et al. 1975) limits the communication of visual data through the visual system during self-generated eye movements, suggesting that it is the data garnered during fixations that are used to constrain perceptual inference. Third, the importance of foveation is illustrated in psychophysical data investigating the relationship between stimulus eccentricity and fading (Lou 1999; Bachy and Zaidi 2014). Faster fading of more eccentric stimuli implies that the choice of fixation location is important and is consistent with the reduced precision associated with data from the retinal periphery relative to the fovea.

We have assumed in the above that estimates of the transition precision remain constant throughout. However, it is highly probable that this is something updated over time, inferred from sensory data. For example simulations of how this sort of updating may proceed using this sort of model, please see Parr et al. (2018). This implies fluctuations in these precisions which, if encoded by chemicals such as noradrenaline, could manifest through changes in pupillary diameter over time. The time-course of this updating may be important when perceptual alternation occurs, and this may be an important direction for future work (Einhäuser et al. 2008, Naber et al. 2011). It additionally offers another avenue by which the relationship between rivalry and perceptual fading may relate to each other that depends upon objective physiological measurements. This could complement the psychophysical and electrophysiological approaches suggested above.

Our account of attention as (covert) action resonates with previous research on the role of attention in binocular rivalry. Although binocular rivalry is highly resistant to volitional control, percept dominance and alternation rate are both sensitive to endogenous attentional allocation (Lack 1974; Ooi and He 1999; Meng and Tong 2004; Chong et al. 2005; van Ee et al. 2005; Paffen et al. 2006; Alais et al. 2010). Such findings are accommodated by the active inference framework, where selective attention is understood as gain control (i.e. descending predictions about the precision of a stimulus). The simulations presented above speak to a rather more subtle, involuntary attentional mechanism; one which drives (rather than modulates) binocular rivalry. Such nonconscious inferential processes could also underwrite various (e.g. affective) factors known to bias rivalrous perceptual experience towards ‘salient’ stimuli (Alpes and Gerdes 2007; Bannerman et al. 2008; Marx and Einhäuser 2015). Salient stimuli afford greater opportunities for the resolution of uncertainty and are thus preferentially sampled (this is equivalent to favouring the more precise stimulus in). Although gain control and salience ascription rest on neurobiologically distinct mechanisms, they are complementary and deeply interwoven modes of uncertainty reduction under the active inference framework (Parr and Friston 2017d).

Although we have cast the model here in terms of binocular rivalry, the computational mechanisms generalize to other forms of multi-stable perception. An important example of this is the Necker cube (Necker 1832; Orbach et al. 1963), an ambiguous image that depicts the edges of a cube, and is equally consistent with a view of the cube from above or below. As in binocular rivalry, this leads to an alternation in perceiving the cube in each alternative configuration. One way to interpret this is that, when we view a cubic structure, one of the vertices is normally hidden from view by the rest of the cube. This means that one of the vertices that could be attended affords evidence to the hypothesis that the cube is oriented one way, whereas another affords evidence to an alternative hypothesis. Based on this, we could use the same generative model as used to simulate binocular rivalry to simulate the experience of multi-stable perception induced by a Necker cube [which could also include overt eye movements (Einhäuser et al. 2004)]. As illustrated in, this would mean replacing the hidden states representing the presence or absence of ‘R’ and ‘L’ with analogous states for presence or absence of a cube viewed from above and below. The outcomes are the associated vertex of each of the two cubes. The attentional state is the same, allowing the selection of a precise likelihood mapping between each cube and the presence or absence of its associated vertex. The above makes the point that the interpretation of the simulations presented above in terms of binocular rivalry rest upon the labels we have assigned to the states and outcomes. Simply changing these generalizes the computational mechanism to other forms of multi-stable perception.

Interestingly, the frequency of perceptual transitions for the Necker cube may be manipulated by physically alternating presentation of the cube and a blank stimulus at different frequencies. Perceptual transitions occur with maximal frequency when the stimulus is presented at a rate of about 2 Hz (Orbach et al. 1966). Given the blank periods in between, this means visual input undergoes a transition at about 4 Hz. This coincides with the theta frequency range associated with saccadic sampling and perceptual sequences. In other words, at this rate, every discrete time-step is aligned with a transition in the real stimulus, implying a generative model where things change at every step. As we move away from this frequency of stimulus presentation (either increased or decreased), this is no longer the case, and we would expect a reduced frequency of perceptual transitions, consistent with empirical observations (Orbach et al. 1963).

Although we have focused upon the computational basis for a certain kind of perceptual phenomenology, this also offers a set of constraints upon the neurobiology for these forms of perceptual awareness. Specifically, it suggests that those pathways engaged in communication between sensory and motor regions are crucial in ensuring active solicitation of informative sensations. Anatomically, there are several prominent white matter tracts connecting the motor and sensory regions (Catani et al. 2002; Thiebaut de Schotten et al. 2005). These structural data are complemented by the engagement of the regions connected by these tracts during functional imaging studies (Büchel et al. 1998; Corbetta et al. 1998; Ptak and Schnider 2010; Corbetta and Shulman 2011; Fiebelkorn et al. 2018). Notably, the same set of frontal and posterior cortical regions seem to be activated by overt (oculomotor) and covert attentional processing. These are typically divided into a symmetrical dorsal frontoparietal network, and a right-lateralized ventral frontoparietal network. It is the latter that has been implicated in imaging studies of rivalry (Lumer et al. 1998; Brascamp et al. 2018), and that is often implicated in disorders of awareness such as visual neglect.

The generative models appealed to here may be interpreted in terms of this anatomy (Parr and Friston 2018), with frontal regions computing either the fixation location or the best attentional target. These presumably exert a modulatory influence, via the right ventral temporoparietal cortex (Sheinberg and Logothetis 1997), over connections from early visual areas to the ventral visual stream in the temporal cortex, and reciprocal projections from temporal to occipital areas. Based on this hypothetical association between the computational architecture associated with active inference and the functional anatomy of rivalry, it should be possible to evaluate the processes we have simulated in relation to neuroimaging data using dynamic causal modelling (Friston et al. 2003). We hypothesize that the effective connectivity between occipital cortices and ventral visual regions representing alternative stimuli (e.g. faces and houses) during rivalry should be modulated whenever a perceptual switch occurs. This modulation should be driven by changes in ventral frontal cortical regions (Weilnhammer et al. 2013). It is worth pointing out that changes in early visual areas, including the lateral geniculate nucleus (Haynes et al. 2005; Wunderlich et al. 2005) and primary visual cortex (Polonsky et al. 2000), have also been demonstrated in the rivalry. These findings endorse the notion of reciprocal message passing, as they suggest that changes in higher cortical regions are propagated to lower cortical and subcortical regions as descending predictions. In the future, the models outlined here should be extended to hierarchical models (Friston et al. 2017c) that try to predict not just the abstract features associated with a stimulus, but also the lower-level visual features that might be represented in earlier parts of the visual pathway. Associating these models with the anatomical structures that implement them offers the opportunity to interpret findings from neuroimaging of perceptual awareness (Rees 2001, Brascamp et al. 2018) in terms of the computational processes that underwrite them.


Conclusion

Visual illusions have often been used in the study of perceptual awareness, as they reveal the importance of internally generated perceptual content when presented with ambiguous stimuli. Typically, models of these processes have implicitly assumed that the brain is a passive recipient of data that engages in inferential processes to try to explain these data. Here, we have focused upon two perceptual phenomena that largely elude this approach. By framing these in terms of the active processes that underwrite engagement with a (potentially) dynamic environment, we find that Troxler fading and perceptual alternation – in the presence of rivalrous stimuli – emerge from the accumulation of uncertainty in beliefs about unattended stimuli, and the drive to act to resolve this uncertainty. Equating elements of the computational mechanisms that underwrite these processes suggests several directions for further empirical investigation, both in terms of the association between an individual’s experience of each of these paradigms, and the functional anatomy that supports these. Ultimately, we hope that this will afford an opportunity to better understand the pathological computations that give rise to abnormalities of perceptual awareness, such as autism, psychosis and visual neglect.


Data Availability Statement

The simulations presented in this article were performed using standard software routines (here spm_MDP_VB_X.m) with the generative models specified as described in the text and figures. These routines are available as Matlab code in the SPM academic software: http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/. Simulations of the sort reported above can be reproduced (and customized) via a graphical user interface by typing in ≫DEM and selecting the ‘visual foraging’ demo.


Why does the mind wander?

Joshua Shepherd — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6804478, CC BY 4.0.

I seek an explanation for the etiology and the function of mind wandering episodes. My proposal—which I call the cognitive control proposal—is that mind wandering is a form of non-conscious guidance due to cognitive control. When the agent’s current goal is deemed insufficiently rewarding, the cognitive control system initiates a search for a new, more rewarding goal. This search is the process of unintentional mind wandering. After developing the proposal, and relating it to the literature on mind wandering and on cognitive control, I discuss explanations the proposal affords, testable predictions the proposal makes, and philosophical implications the proposal has.

Keywords: mind wandering, cognitive control, agency, intention, volition


Introduction


Minds wander

Some wander more than others, but human ones wander a lot. A much-cited estimate, due to Killingsworth and Gilbert (2010), has it that the awake human mind spends from a third to half its time wandering. That’s a big range, a rough estimate, and there are good reasons to be suspicious of it (see Seli et al. 2018). The actual number will likely depend a bit upon the nature of mind wandering, a bit upon whether we have the right measure to produce such an estimate, and of course a bit on individual variability. Estimates aside, though, introspection reports that the mind wanders surprisingly often. My question here is this.


Why does it happen?

Sub-questions include the following. What drives the mind to wander? Does anything drive it to wander? Is the transition from focused thought to meandering thought random? Is it a failure of control, or is there some dark purpose behind these mental movements?

In the next section, I set the table by discussing a few interesting features of mind wandering, as well as a few recent proposals about its etiology, and its function. It is easy to conflate these two, since if mind wandering has a function its etiology may very well help illuminate it, but the questions are distinct. Here, I am more interested in why mind wandering happens—about its etiology. It turns out, though, that on my proposal mind wandering happens for good functional reasons. I develop this proposal, which I call the cognitive control proposal, in Cognitive control and Why the mind wanders sections. In Explanations section, I discuss some explanations this proposal makes possible. In Predictions section, I discuss some predictions that could confirm or disconfirm the proposal. In Philosophical implications section, I discuss implications for a philosophical account of the nature of mind wandering.


Mind Wandering

The term “mind wandering,” used as a construct in psychological theorizing, is relatively young. In a seminal paper, Smallwood and Schooler (2006) argued that research on disparate constructs—they mention task-unrelated thought, task-unrelated images, stimulus-independent thought, mind pops, and zone outs—could be unified under a single moniker.

By referring to this phenomenon as mind wandering, a term familiar to the lay person, we hope to elevate the status of this research into mainstream psychological thinking (946).

As Murray et al. (2019) report, since that review, usage of “mind wandering” has risen dramatically. Only the Smallwood and Schooler paper used the term in a title or abstract in 2006. In 2018, the term appeared in 132 titles or abstracts.

Increased attention to the range of phenomena grouped together by “mind wandering” is salutary. But theorists recognize that the range of processes the term groups may contain multiple etiologies and processing signatures. Accordingly, theorists have proposed many sub-types of mind wandering, categorizing episodes of mind wandering in at least three distinct ways.

The first two involve a conception of mind wandering as defined in part by the contents of a mind-wandering episode, where the contents are unrelated to a task an agent was performing, or was supposed to perform. But there are various ways for an agent to engage in task-unrelated thought. Some categorize mind-wandering episodes in terms of a relationship to an agent’s intention: mind wandering might occur intentionally or unintentionally (Giambra 1995; Seli et al. 2016). A second way to categorize mind-wandering episodes is in terms of a relationship to external stimuli. One might here distinguish between distraction, when the mind is prompted to wander by external stimuli, and mind wandering, when the mind is prompted to wander by internal processes, independently of any particular stimuli (see Stawarczyk et al. 2013). Or one could argue that distraction, especially sustained distraction, is a legitimate mind wandering as well.

A third way to characterize mind wandering is not in terms of its contents, but rather its dynamics. So, e.g., Christoff et al. (2016) characterize mind wandering as a species of spontaneous thought, with distinct dynamics. Mind wandering is distinguished from creative thought, and rumination, and other types of mental episodes, by relation to the presence or absence of various constraints on the episode (e.g., what they call “deliberate” and “automatic” constraints).

From a certain height, it appears that these different characterizations may not be in competition. Perhaps there are many routes to mind wandering. Perhaps some of them overlap. Perhaps different questions can be answered by focusing on certain routes in certain contexts. Reasonably, Seli et al. (2018) have recently argued in favor of mind wandering as a natural kind, with different sub-types grouped together by relations akin to family resemblance: “We propose that the field acknowledge mind-wandering to be a multidimensional and fuzzy construct encompassing a family of experiences with common and unique features” (2018, 482).

Thinking of mind wandering in this way fits well with other work on the nature of natural kinds, according to which tokens of a natural kind share some—but not necessarily all—of a class of stable similarities, which cluster together thanks to underlying causal mechanisms (Boyd 1991). Thinking of mind wandering in this way does not foreclose the possibility that further empirical exploration will reveal important distinctions amongst sub-types of mind wandering, or will reveal a need to revise the construct of mind wandering in favor of a construct (or constructs) more precise or fruitful (for a similar point, and criticism of the family resemblances view, see Christoff et al. 2018). Nor does thinking of mind wandering in this way remove the need for precision regarding the sub-types of mind wandering. Seli et al. (2018), e.g., advise that papers on mind wandering remain explicit, as follows.

Methodological and conceptual clarity will simply require, in empirical manuscripts, something like the following sentence: “Here, we conceptualized mind-wandering as ________, and operationally defined it for our participants as ________.” Critically, this approach allows researchers the freedom to study whatever features of mind-wandering they wish, while providing the required specificity about aspects of the experience being explored. (488)

In the same spirit, I note here the sub-type of mind wandering that concerns me. I am interested in unintentional mind wandering—episodes of mind wandering that are neither initiated nor governed by any reportable intention of the agent. This category may cross-cut any relationship to external stimuli, in the sense that unintentional mind wandering could be externally or internally initiated. And it may demonstrate dynamics that are distinct from other sub-types of mind wandering.

Unintentional mind wandering could in principle happen non-consciously. But the literature on human mind wandering has it pegged as a feature of the conscious mind. That is to say, when the mind wanders, what wanders is the stream of consciousness—processes of conscious mentation. So, one key way to study mind wandering is to ask people whether or how often their mind has wandered. People offer reports about it. They recognize that they have been mind wandering. This is not because of mind wandering’s phenomenological signature. It is rather because people have a sense that they were once up to something, and then, more or less unbeknownst to them, they began to be up to something else. Thomas Metzinger (2013) speaks of this as the self-representational blink: an unnoticed shift from pursuing one task to doing whatever it is we do when the mind wanders. Recognizing that your mind has been wandering is always slightly surprising, because you did not plan for things to go in that way. From your perspective, it seems that they just did.

This is puzzling. But calling a mental episode unintentional need not imply that mind wandering is maladaptive, or that it has no function. Indeed, the very frequency with which it occurs had led many to suggest that it must have some functional role (e.g., Baird et al. 2011). It may not, of course. Perhaps, we survive in spite of how mentally addled we all are. But it is at least plausible that there is a function.

Some accounts of mind wandering might be taken to deny this. McVay and Kane (2010a) and Kane and McVay (2012), e.g., have argued that mind wandering reflects a failure of executive control. They note that a negative correlation exists between working memory capacity and a tendency to experience task-unrelated thoughts (see also Randall et al. 2014). Some such correlation is plausible. When one experiences task-unrelated mentation, something has clearly gone wrong. One has failed to stay on task.

But this also fails to imply that mind wandering has no function. Kane and McVay note that the correlation between working memory capacity and task-unrelated thought is not terribly strong: “WMC accounts for only about 5% of the variability in [task-unrelated thought] TUT rates (and vice versa)” (2012, 352). It is possible that mind wandering is both a failure in one sense and adaptive in another.

Indeed Kane and McVay’s data indicate this in the following way. They demonstrate that when task demands are high, greater working memory capacity is correlated with fewer task-unrelated thoughts. Other work suggests that when task demands are low, greater working memory capacity correlates with the occurrence of more task-unrelated thoughts (Levinson et al. 2012), although a preregistered replication attempt failed to find the same correlation (Meier 2019). Further, recent work demonstrates that the role of cognitive control in mind wandering is somewhat malleable, with those who possess more cognitive control mind wandering at more strategic times (Seli et al. 2018). Rummel and Boywitt (2014) found that participants with higher working memory capacity both [a] demonstrated an increased tendency to mind wander (operationalized as the experience of task-unrelated thoughts (TUTs)) in less demanding tasks, and [b] showed less performance decrements on these same tasks. They comment:

[W]e found evidence for the hypothesis that cognitive control abilities are specifically involved in the flexible adjustment of mind-wandering to task demands. As was hypothesized, high-WMC participants showed higher levels of TUT adjustment than did low-WMC participants. Thus, a more flexible coordination of the stream of thought appears to be characteristic of high-WMC individuals: They engage in TUTs when situational demands are low but reduce TUTs in attention-demanding situations. (1313)

This hypothesis is consistent with work that has demonstrated that as cognitive control resources diminish with age, the propensity to mind wander diminishes as well (Maillet and Schacter 2016).

If we are to believe that mind wandering is associated with deployments of cognitive control, we need evidence that when agents mind wander, they engage in thought processes that may be beneficial. Some evidence for this is that when agents mind wander, their thoughts very frequently go to non-occurrent goals and needs, and to mentation about how to satisfy these goals in the future (Klinger 1999; Baird et al. 2011).

Indeed, as Irving and Thompson (2019) note, it seems that it is possible to manipulate the content of mind wandering episodes by giving agents specific goals. Morsella et al. (2010) told some participants they would, in the near future, have to answer questions about the states in America. Then they gave the participants a different task. About 70 percent of these participants’ task-unrelated thoughts were about U.S. geography. Similarly, Mac Giolla et al. (2017) gave some participants a real future task, and told different participants to only pretend to have (or to lie about having) the same future task. Those participants with genuine intentions reported much more spontaneous thought about the future task than participants without genuine intentions.

It is also possible to manipulate mind wandering by reminding agents of their goals. Kopp et al. (2015) had participants either construct a list of their plans for the week or list features of a car. Participants then performed a reading task. Participants who had just reviewed a set of their own plans and goals reported much more mind wandering during the reading.

There is thus an apparent tension within mind wandering. When the mind wanders (at least unintentionally), agents are distracted from the current task, and performance suffers. But when the mind wanders, it tends to find non-occurrent goals the agent possesses, generating planning that could be beneficial. What’s more, greater cognitive control is associated with increases in mind wandering, especially when task demands are low.

Recall my original question: why does the mind wander? Two related questions that could help: What causes it to start, and what explains what happens as it wanders?

My proposed answer runs through recent work on cognitive control, and on what kinds of mechanisms drive allocations of cognitive control resources. I discuss this work in the next section.


Cognitive Control

Although the term “cognitive control” is in wide use in psychology and neuroscience, pinning down its referent is not straightforward. In an influential paper, Botvinick et al. characterize it in terms of flexible adjustment of processing towards some end (or set of ends):

A remarkable feature of the human cognitive system is its ability to configure itself for the performance of specific tasks through appropriate adjustments in perceptual selection, response biasing and the on-line maintenance of contextual information. The processes behind such adaptability, referred to collectively as cognitive control … (Botvinick et al. 2001, 624)

Rouault and Koechlin likewise emphasize processes of regulation towards certain ends: “Cognitive control refers to mental processes that evolve as regulating adaptive behavior beyond basic reinforcement and associative learning processes” (2018, 106).

There is a danger here, analogous to the one just discussed regarding definitions of mind wandering, in including far too many process-types under the same heading. “Cognitive control” includes processes like the construction and maintenance of a task set, the switching from one task set to another, the deployment of attention in various ways, the deployment of inhibition, and the monitoring of an agent’s progress towards goal achievement. To get better at understanding how these processes work together (or don’t), it helps to have a label. But the nature of the system is only loosely delineated.

Given this, there is room for differing emphases. So, e.g., Adele Diamond characterizes cognitive control processes as “a family of top-down mental processes needed when you have to concentrate and pay attention, when going on automatic or relying on instinct or intuition would be ill-advised, insufficient, or impossible” (136). This characterization is useful, but not definitive. For the kind of cognitive control processes, I have in mind here might be considered top-down, but do not activate only when agents need to deploy attention. These processes operate outside of the agent’s awareness, influencing the agent’s thought and action in subtle and difficult to detect ways.

So, e.g., Kurzban et al. (2013) have argued that one subtle way cognitive control mechanisms influence thought and action is by generating an experience of effort related to the performance of some task. They hypothesize that the experience of effort is the result of sub-personal computations that determine the current task’s value, as well as the value of nearby available tasks, and output a determination of the opportunity cost of persisting on the current task. The experience of effort is hypothesized to be a signal to the agent to switch tasks.

Kurzban et al.’s proposal has received a lot of attention. Few agree with all of the specifics, but most agree with the general perspective that sub-personal monitoring mechanisms are concerned to determine the value of succeeding in the current task, as well as the cost of continuing engagement in the current task, and are concerned to, in some sense, direct the agent or her cognitive control resources in a more fruitful way.

Perhaps the most mature theory characterizing the mechanisms that constitute the allocation of cognitive control is the Expected Value of Control theory (see Shenhav et al. 2013). The general idea is that the cognitive control system “specifies how much control to exert according to a rational cost-benefit analysis, weighing these effort costs against attendant rewards for achieving one’s goals” (Lieder et al. 2018, 2). Lieder et al. add to this idea a sophisticated model of how the cognitive control system might come to learn the value of the various control signals it can deploy, and might rely upon what it learns to guide cognition in adaptive ways.

Lieder et al. characterize the position the cognitive control system is typically in as a Markov decision process, specified over certain parameters, driven by reinforcement learning. Those parameters are the initial state of the system, the set of states the system could be in, the set of possible actions (or moves, or operations) the system could take, the conditional probabilities of transitioning between states, and a reward function. Lieder et al. further characterize the actions the system could take as “control signals that specify which computations the controlled systems should perform” (4).

Given this setup, the main aim is to maximize reward via the specification of control signals. The way the system does this is by way of learning algorithms. The system builds and updates a model that specifies transition probabilities between states given different control signals, and that maps these probabilities onto a reward function. The reward function balances the reward associated with an outcome (a new state), together with the computational costs of specifying the computation required to drive the system towards the outcome. So, what the system is designed to do is to take the action (specify the control signal or the package of control signals) that has the highest expected value, given the probabilities of where the action takes the system, and the costs of taking the action.

The hypothesis here is that “the cognitive control system learns to predict the context-dependent value of alternative control signals” (5), and that these predictions determine which actions the system takes.

In cases in which the context is relatively well-known, Lieder et al. posit that the system will depend upon relationships between features of the internal state of the agent and features of the context, and will perform weighted sum calculations to determine the value of various possible actions. Cases in which the context is not well-known are more difficult. But Lieder et al. propose that in such cases the system may utilize exploration strategies to teach itself the value of various actions in the novel situation. These exploration strategies involve drawing samples of the value of control signals in previously encountered contexts, averaging over them, and again selecting the control signal that provides the highest expected value.

Lieder et al. note that “This model is very general and can be applied to model cognitive control of many different processes” (6). And they offer a proof of concept for it, by demonstrating that their model outperforms alternative models across a range of processing types.

These processing types involve learning what features of a task are predictive of reward. Some of them are quite simple. One task on which their model performed well-involved learning where to allocate attention, based upon variable reward offered for attending to different locations. A second task involved learning the difference between colors that indicate reward, and colors that do not. That the model predicts basic learning of this sort is good, but not too surprising.

Other processing types are more complicated. One task on which the model did well was an incongruent Stroop task run by Braem et al. (2012). In this task, participants saw a central square flanked by two other squares. They had to name the color of the square. In one condition, the flankers were the same color as the central square. In another condition, the flankers were incongruently colored. When participants received a reward for their response on a congruent trial, they became much quicker to respond on a subsequent trial, suggesting they had learned that the automatic (low-control) mode of response was best. When participants received a reward for their response on an incongruent trial, they became much slower to respond on a subsequent trial, suggesting they had learned that the high-control mode of response was best. Lieder et al. comment:

The expected value of computation depends not only on the rewards for correct performance but also on the difficulty of the task. In easy situations, such as the congruent trials of the Stroop task, the automatic response can be as accurate, faster, and less costly than the controlled response. In cases like this, the expected value of exerting control is less than the EVOC of exerting no control. By contrast, in more challenging situations, such as incongruent Stroop trials, the controlled process is more accurate and therefore has a positive EVOC as long as accurate performance is sufficiently important. Therefore, on incongruent trials the expected value of control is larger than the EVOC of exerting no control. Our model thus learns to exert control on incongruent trials but not on congruent trials. Our model achieves this by learning to predict the EVOC from features of the stimuli. This predicts that people should learn to exert more control when they encounter a stimulus feature (such as a color or word) that is predictive of incongruence than when they encounter a feature that is predictive of congruence. (19)

Of course, agents are rarely aware that a system (or coordinated collection of mechanisms) within them is busy learning the value of different modes of responding, and guiding the way that they deploy cognitive control resources. We are not here explaining explicit deliberation or planning. But we are getting insight into the processes—sub-personal, if you like—that create the cognitive ocean in which more explicit processes swim. What’s more, we are getting insight into the kinds of learning that drive cognitive control operations that agents have to simply live with. Shifts of attention, pulls to engage in various computational operations, a sense of what operations are valuable in what contexts—these are rarely things we explicitly consider. Rather, we depend upon this background to engage in explicit cognition and intentional action.

With this as background, I can suggest an interesting possibility, leading to a proposal regarding the etiology and function of mind wandering.


Why the Mind Wanders

The possibility is this. Depending on the cognitive control system’s model of the value of various control signals, in cases containing relatively little expected value the system may select a package of control signals leading to exploration. These would be cases in which the goal is to find a new and better goal. And the method, which remains here unclear—although one could imagine it involving shifts of attention, construction of task sets involving imagination, inhibition of current goals, etc.—might be generally described as disengagement from the present task in order to set out upon a search for a more valuable task.

The cognitive control proposal, then, is this. Mind wandering is caused by the cognitive control system precisely when, and because, the expected value of whatever the agent is doing—usually, exercising control towards the achievement of some occurrent goal—is deemed too low, and this “too low” judgment generates a search for a better goal, or task. Perhaps, e.g., the estimation of expected value dips below a value threshold attached to the package of control signals that generate exploration for another goal, or task. Or perhaps the value is always computed in comparison with available options, such that mind wandering is sometimes initiated even in the face of a rewarding current task.

This is a straightforwardly empirical proposal, and should be assessed in terms of the explanations it affords, and by whether the predictions it makes are confirmed or disconfirmed. Before I discuss explanation and prediction, however, I wish to note two things.

First, it would certainly be useful if the cognitive control system contained such an operation. Humans are sophisticated agents, with multiple needs and goals potentially in play in most waking life situations. Fixation on one goal alone, or working towards the satisfaction of one goal at a time, is not a great strategy for flourishing. For, first, if one gets stuck on a difficult goal, or if it becomes apparent (i.e. apparent at least to some system tasked with calculating such a thing) that the present goal is not as rewarding as once calculated, it is much wiser to disengage and seek a better goal. And, second, in many situations progress towards multiple goals at once is possible. All one needs is the capacity to divide attention somewhat, or the capacity to hold multiple goals in mind—or at least within some accessible place—and one might waste much less time. Notice, further, that the above points may hold even if dividing the mind amongst multiple goals leads to performance decrements. Perfect performance is not always required. So long as mediocre performance allows one to satisfy goals and needs, accepting mediocre performance will be a good strategy.

Second, explicit cognitive control already does contain such an operation. Sometimes a task becomes too effortful, too uncomfortable, or too boring. Sometimes—after one has just awakened from a long nap, e.g.—there’s no obvious task at hand. In such cases performing a search for a high-value goal is a familiar operation that we perform explicitly. In other cases, we do not leave behind the current task, but we rather utilize deliberation, prospection, imagination, and other processes in order to find sub-goals, or means to achieve the goal that is currently structuring behavior. These modes of exploration towards discovery of a high-value goal are explicit. Our question here is whether the cognitive control system implicitly—i.e., in the absence of an explicit or conscious formation of intention to do so—initiates mind wandering as a similar mode of exploration, and for similar reasons. The proposal is that it does.


Explanations

Here are explanations this proposal affords.

First, this proposal offers an explanation for the initiation of mind wandering episodes. These episodes are initiated without the agent’s explicit consent. But they do frequently occur. One possible explanation is that the agent necessarily loses control in these instances. That characterizes the initiation of a mind wandering episode as random. A better explanation, I submit, is that while the initiation of a mind wandering episode is, in one sense, a failure—a failure of the current goal and task set to persist—it is, in another sense, a smart move. It is smart because it results from a cognitive control system that is more or less constantly attempting to determine the value of selecting packages of control signals, and that will act when discrepancies in value are calculated. Note, incidentally, that this could be extended to cases in which the agent is pursuing no particular goal, or has no current task. The system need not always compare value between goals. It might be useful, e.g., to tag expected levels of reward to particular environments, perhaps by averaging over the kinds of rewards an environment-type provides. If agents associate one type of environment—a party, e.g.,—to a plethora of rewarding experiences, then a signal that this environment is near—one can hear party music, e.g.,—might lead the mind to wander in the direction of the kinds of experiences the rewarding environment provides.

The fact that the initiation of mind wandering episodes is smart helps to additionally explain a second fact, namely, that agents with higher levels of cognitive control mind wander more frequently when the current task is easy or non-rewarding.

This is not to deny that mind wandering episodes may sometimes be initiated by affectively salient stimuli, or other distractors. Nor is it to deny the existence of completely unguided, or otherwise guided, episodes of mind wandering. I am not in a position to deny that, e.g., a case of spreading activation in a semantic network could qualify as unintentional mind wandering. It may very well be—indeed it seems plausible—that only some cases of unintentional mind wandering are controlled in the way I here propose. Note, however, that even if this is right, the cognitive control system may be able to interact with uncontrolled mind wandering processes. In some cases, uncontrolled mind wandering could be commandeered if a valuable goal suggests itself.

Third, this proposal offers an explanation for the fact that mind wandering episodes tend to go to other goals the agent possesses. This is a natural place for a process to go if that process is structured by an aim to find a more rewarding goal than the one from which the agent has just disengaged. For it will be much more cost-effective to find existent goals, perhaps by querying memory, than to explore the environment and to construct entirely new goals (although of course this may happen, especially when the environment easily affords novel and rewarding goals).

Fourth, this proposal might be integrated with extant explanations of aspects of mind wandering. Consider, e.g., the decoupling hypothesis (Antrobus et al. 1970; Smallwood et al. 2003; Smallwood and Schooler 2006)—the idea that once mind wandering is underway, domain-general cognitive processes are engaged to maintain the mind wandering episode, by keeping attention decoupled from perceptual input, and by aiding the “continuity and integrity” of the agent’s train of thought (Smallwood 2013, 524). As Smallwood (2013) notes, the decoupling hypothesis does not seek to explain the initiation of mind wandering. The cognitive control proposal is consistent with it. That is, the proposal is consistent with domain-general resources being deployed to assist mind wandering episodes. The main comment I wish to make here is that the decoupling hypothesis becomes more plausible, and data on the deployment of domain-general resources in mind wandering more transparent, if the entire process of mind wandering can be seen as goal-directed, where the goal is set by the cognitive control system.

This proposal is also consistent with work on the recruitment of neural areas during mind wandering. Christoff et al., e.g. (Christoff et al. 2009; Fox et al. 2015), have found that episodes of mind wandering recruited not only core areas of the default mode network—medial PFC, posterior cingulate/precuneus, and posterior temporoparietal cortex—but also dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, “the 2 main regions of the executive network” (Christoff et al. 2009, 8722). Christoff et al. plausibly link the involvement of the executive network with task performance decrements. The cognitive control proposal adds the possibility that executive network recruitment is associated with the goal-directed nature of (at least some) unintentional mind wandering.

Consider, further, recent work on the dynamics of mind wandering. In a recent review, Christoff et al. (2016) rightly notice that much research on mind wandering has been content-based, “assessing the contents of thoughts in terms of their relationship to an ongoing task or activity” (722). They seek, instead, to offer a taxonomy of thought-types in terms of their dynamics—of how they operate over time. They propose two dimensions along which the dynamics of thought may be influenced. The first dimension is characterized in terms of the degree to which thought is constrained by mechanisms that are “flexible, deliberate, and implemented through cognitive control” (719). The paradigm here is the intentional generation of a deliberative process, or the intentional maintenance of attention on a task. The second dimension is characterized in terms of the degree to which thought is constrained by mechanisms that are automatic, in that they “operate outside of cognitive control to hold attention on a restricted set of information” (719). There are many ways thought may be automatically distracted—Christoff et al. mention affectively salient stimuli as one example.

They place mind wandering near other types of spontaneous thought in the two-dimensional space:

Within our framework, mind-wandering can be defined as a special case of spontaneous thought that tends to be more-deliberately constrained than dreaming, but less-deliberately constrained than creative thinking and goal-directed thought. In addition, mind-wandering can be clearly distinguished from rumination and other types of thought that are marked by a high degree of automatic constraints, such as obsessive thought. (719)

Now, this is not an explanation of why the mind wanders. It is, instead, a mapping of mind wandering onto a broader taxonomy of cognitive kinds, with special attention given to other modes of spontaneous thought. This taxonomy is useful for a number of reasons. For example, Christoff et al. map their taxonomy onto areas of the brain. So they say, e.g., that the part of the default network that centers on the medial temporal lobe is likely to be involved in the generation of mind wandering, as well as, via “its involvement in contextual associative processing” (724), the conceptual variability of some episodes of mind wandering. They also link the hippocampus to mind wandering, suggesting that it may contribute to the “imaginative construction” of hypothetical scenarios. Such mapping work from aspects of spontaneous thought onto activity patterns in large-scale brain networks affords fruitful suggestions for future study of the kinds of psychological patterns and activities that characterize mind wandering over time.

But there are possibilities and explanations that this approach does not (yet) address, and that potentially have consequences for the taxonomy of cognitive kinds that they offer.

Consider, e.g., the distinction they draw between mind wandering and creative thought. The difference is supposed to be a movement along the dimension of flexible, goal-directed constraints, with creative thinking requiring more cognitive control. But they note that creative thinking seems more complex than this:

Creative thinking may be unique among other spontaneous-thought processes because it may involve dynamic shifts between the two ends of the spectrum of constraints. The creative process tends to alternate between the generation of new ideas, which would be highly spontaneous, and the critical evaluation of these ideas, which could be as constrained as goal-directed thought in terms of deliberate constraints and is likely to be associated with a higher degree of automatic constraints than goal-directed thought because creative individuals frequently use their emotional and visceral reactions (colloquially often referred to as “gut” reactions) while evaluating their own creative ideas. (Box 1, 720)

I suggest that mind wandering is similarly complex. If the cognitive control proposal is correct, then in at least some cases mind wandering is initiated by processes of cognitive control, even though the goal driving mind wandering is not set explicitly by the agent. This could be captured by adding layers onto Christoff et al.’s taxonomy, deepening explanations of the etiology and function of each kind of spontaneous thought. And these deeper explanations at each place could be expected to bear fruit for understanding the dynamics of spontaneous thought. In particular, we might hope to find patterns in the neural dynamics that are predictive of the onset as well as the termination of mind wandering episodes, and that differentiate it from dreaming, creative thought, and perhaps from rumination. If the cognitive control proposal is correct, one task would be to map these patterns onto the expected value calculations the cognitive control system is performing. We would expect the dynamics of mind wandering to reflect the initiation of a search for a more rewarding goal, and to reflect attempts to make progress on this search. But now I’m jumping ahead, to predictions the proposal generates.


Predictions

The cognitive control proposal makes predictions. Confirmation of these would be good news; disconfirmation would be bad news.

First, given the explanation offered for the initiation of mind wandering episodes, the proposal predicts that increases in reward for satisfying an occurrent goal would correlate with decreases in propensity to mind wander. It is well-confirmed that increasing reward leads to boosts in performance level, and to overcoming any purported “ego-depletion,” even for very boring tasks. Paradigms that have established this result could be used to test for the place of mind wandering in the behavioral data.

Second, the proposal predicts that increases in reward for non-occurrent goals the agent possesses would increase mind wandering. We have already seen that reminding agents of goals they possess, or of goals they will soon need to attempt to satisfy, leads to more mind wandering in the direction of these goals. The prediction here is more specific. If one were to, e.g., notify participants that they were soon to perform a task associated with some level of reward, and then to put participants through a low reward task, the prediction is that tendency to mind wander towards this task would be associated with the discrepancy in reward between the current and upcoming task.

Third, this proposal draws upon a view of the cognitive control system on which the learning of values associated with goals, and the learning of values associated with stimuli features predictive of goals, is crucial. So the proposal, plus plausible assumptions about reinforcement learning processes, predicts that it is possible to train participants to associate stimuli with certain goals, and that registration of such stimuli would generate mind wandering to the degree that the associated goal is rewarding. Very costly goals would produce little mind wandering. Cheap but rewarding goals would produce more.

And it may be possible to extend this result. It depends on what the agent associates with rewarding goals. Above I suggested that the system need not always compare value between explicit goals, and that the value computation might include an association between expected levels of reward and particular environments. If so, simply placing an agent in such environments would manipulate levels of unintentional mind wandering.

It may be useful to distinguish predictions this proposal makes from a related proposal: the current concerns hypothesis. The current concerns hypothesis (for which, see Klinger et al. 1973; Smallwood and Schooler 2006) has it that mind wandering is caused by a shift in salience—when one’s current goals (or concerns: here I use these terms interchangeably), become more salient than the external environment, one’s mind begins to wander. As Smallwood explains the view, “attention will be most likely to shift to self-generated material when such information offers larger incentive value than does the information in the external environment” (2013, 524). This proposal is distinct from mine in the following ways. First, I propose a specific mechanism, connected with recent modeling work in cognitive control, to explain the onset of mind wandering. Thus far, of course, the proposal can be seen as a specification of the current concerns hypothesis. Second, this mechanism initiates mind wandering not by turning attention to one’s current concerns, but by directed thought to search for a more valuable goal than the present one. So the cognitive control proposal makes predictions the current concerns hypothesis does not. For example, the cognitive control proposal predicts that propensity to mind wander could be increased by devaluing the present goal, independently of the salience of any of one’s current goals. That is, no matter how much one’s current goals or concerns lack salience, once could increase mind wandering by devaluing the occurrent goal. And it predicts that mind wandering will not turn directly to one’s other goals—the mind may wander to the environment, rather than to internal concerns, since this is one way the agent may attempt to find a more rewarding task. So we should, e.g., be able to find episodes of more intense environmental scanning as a part of the mind wandering episode. Indeed, if the environment is expected to contain valuable options, one would predict that this is where attention will go, rather than to any internal space of concerns.

This is not to deny that mind wandering represents a failure in some sense. McVay and Kane (2010b) have argued that mind wandering represents an executive control failure. What fails is a process of goal maintenance: “we suggest that goal maintenance is often hijacked by task-unrelated thought (TUT), resulting in both the subjective experience of mind wandering and habit-based errors” (324). The possibility I am raising is that failures of goal-maintenance could in another sense be successes of a different process. Indeed, perhaps processes of goal-maintenance are closely related to the value-based process of estimating the expected value of continuing on some task, or of searching for a new task, that I propose underlies unintentional mind wandering.

In sum, the proposal is plausible on its face. If correct, it promises to explain a range of data regarding mind wandering, and to explain the—from the agent’s conscious perspective very puzzling—initiation of mind wandering episodes. The proposal may also contribute to explanations of the dynamics of mind wandering. The predictions this proposal makes are testable, and work in this direction might take steps towards further integrating knowledge of how cognitive control works with knowledge of how mind wandering works.


Philosophical Implications

I wish finally to relate this proposal to two leading philosophical accounts of mind wandering. Both of these accounts aim to capture mind wandering quite generally. I have noted in Mind wandering section that this is not my aim. Here, I want only to discuss implications for these more general accounts of mind wandering, if the cognitive control proposal about unintentional mind wandering is on track.

I turn first to Thomas Metzinger (2013). Metzinger’s thoughts on mind wandering are complex; here I focus only on one specific part of the picture, an item he calls mental autonomy. This is a technical notion for Metzinger, and he considers it essential: mind wandering, for Metzinger, essentially involves a loss of mental autonomy. He characterizes mental autonomy as:

[T]he ability to control the conscious contents of one’s mind in a goal-directed way, by means of attentional or cognitive agency. This ability can be a form of rational self-control, which is based on reasons, beliefs, and conceptual thought, but it does not have to be. What is crucial is the “veto component”: Being mentally autonomous means that all currently ongoing processes can in principle be suspended or terminated. This does not mean that they actually are terminated, it just means that the ability, the functional potential, is given and that the person has knowledge of this fact. M-autonomy is the capacity for causal self-determination on the mental level. (2013, 4)

I think the brush strokes Metzinger uses are too broad. I doubt we have veto control over every conscious process ongoing at a time. But I do think he locates an interesting phenomenon. In unintentional mind wandering, our knowledge (or awareness) that we might suspend, terminate, or re-direct aspects of the stream of consciousness lapses.

My question is this. Should we think of this lapse as the agent’s loss of control? As Metzinger has it, mind wandering essentially involves a lack of ability, and a lack of control—what he calls veto control. I agree that unintentional mind wandering does involve a loss of one kind of control. But I would underline the fact that there are multiple ways for a system to exercise control. Some of these involve consciousness in crucial ways. Some likely do not (Shepherd 2015). Knowledge that one can exercise control in some way at a moment can be useful. But a system may be well-designed, and exercise control in finding or executing goals, even if the system is not explicitly aware of processes that are performing these functions at a time.

Further, there are multiple ways for a system or an agent to possess an ability. The mind wandering agent may lack the ability to suspend, terminate, or re-direct elements of the stream of consciousness in virtue of her knowledge or awareness that she can do so. But she may retain the ability to suspend, terminate, or re-direct elements of the stream of consciousness in virtue of other features—perhaps in virtue of signals that emanate from the cognitive control processes I have emphasized.

This is not a merely verbal distinction. It is about how we understand the constitution of agency, and the kinds of properties that should be ascribed to mind wandering. If the cognitive control proposal is right, mind wandering emerges as an interesting case in which the seams of agency pull apart somewhat—we fail to notice that a non-conscious mechanism has turned the stream of consciousness in a different direction. But there may be good functional reasons for this operation, and it may contribute to an agent’s overall capacities to control the self in various environments and contexts.

I turn next to Zachary Irving (2016), who argues that mind wandering is unguided attention—or, as he says elsewhere (in Irving and Thompson 2019), unguided thinking. Irving seeks to preserve what he calls the “core intuition” that mind wandering is purposeless. He captures this intuition by explicating the sense in which mind wandering is unguided. It involves the absence of anything drawing the agent’s attention back to some goal.

An agent A’s attention is unguided if and only if A is not habitually guided to focus her attention on any information. In particular, she does not satisfy the counter-factual condition for attentional guidance: There is no information i such that, if A’s attention isn’t focused on i, she will notice, feel discomfited by, and thereby be disposed to correct this fact. (567)

I am not sure this is right. Mind wandering episodes are sometimes short. Sometimes they stop, it seems to me, precisely because we feel a sense that we were recently up to something, and we feel a pull to return. The cognitive control proposal might be able to explain this—one good move for the cognitive control system, in case of a failure to find a more rewarding task or goal, would be to return to the previous task.

Irving is aware that when it wanders, the mind frequently circles back to the agent’s goals. Does this not suggest guidance of some sort? Irving explains the tension by distinguishing between guidance and motivation. Motivated behavior only requires that an agent’s beliefs, desires, or goals are causal antecedents of the behavior. Guided behavior, by contrast, is explicated in terms of dynamics: it “involves the online monitoring and regulation of behavior” (563). Irving claims that mind wandering may be motivated, but it is not guided.

This aspect of Irving’s account does not compare favorably with the cognitive control proposal—if, of course, future work confirms the proposal. For Irving’s account offers no explanation of how causation by some belief or desire or goal helps explain how or why the wandering mind frequently turns to the agent’s goals. The cognitive control proposal has it that the wandering mind finds goals because that aim is what initiated and governs the mind wandering episode.

Further, if my proposal is right it is not entirely correct to think of mind wandering as unguided. It is, admittedly, not guided by any explicit intention the agent forms. In one sense of “guided,” then, Irving is right. But on the cognitive control proposal, mind wandering is a cognitive control process, and it does have a purpose. It seems purposeless to us in part because it is an interesting case in which some of the seams of agency pull apart somewhat—we do not notice that a non-conscious mechanism has turned the stream of consciousness in a different direction. And it seems purposeless to us in part because the course of the stream of consciousness during mind wandering is, as the cognitive control system plans it, meandering. It is meandering because the goal is to search, to explore, until a more rewarding task is found.

If these considerations are on track, we should say that mind wandering takes the form of a conscious but non-consciously guided process the aim of which is to find a rewarding goal or task. The connection with the cognitive control system explains the guidance aspect—the functionality of mind wandering—and affords the possibility of integration with work on the dynamics of mind wandering. The non-conscious aspect of the guidance explains the air of mystery surrounding mind wandering, why it seems purposeless, and why it seems to come about randomly.


Conclusion

In this article, I have asked why the mind wanders. I focused on a sub-type of mind wandering—mind wandering that occurs independently of any reportable intention. I proposed that unintentional mind wandering is sometimes initiated and sustained by aspects of cognitive control. Unintentional mind wandering is caused by the cognitive control system precisely when, and because, the expected value of whatever the agent is doing—usually, exercising control towards achievement of some occurrent goal—is deemed too low, and this “too low” judgment generates a search for a better goal, or task.

This proposal generates testable predictions, and suggests open possibilities regarding the kinds of computations that may underlie unintentional mind wandering. My hope is that by connecting research on mind wandering with research on cognitive control resource allocation, fruitful strategies for modeling these computations may be taken from cognitive control research and deployed to help explain the initiation and dynamics of mind wandering episodes.

The cognitive control proposal also points us towards a fuller picture of human agency. In this picture, action control and intelligent thought are stitched together by conscious and non-conscious processes operating in concert. Future empirical work is critical to the confirmation of this picture, and to filling in the many unspecified details. This is so not least because, if the proposal I offer is on track, agents are not introspectively aware of the (good) rationale behind many mind-wandering episodes.


Deflating inflation: the connection (or lack thereof) between decisional and metacognitive processes and visual phenomenology

Greyson Abid — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6857601, CC BY 4.0.

Vision presents us with a richly detailed world. Yet, there is a range of limitations in the processing of visual information, such as poor peripheral resolution and failures to notice things we do not attend. This raises a natural question: How do we seem to see so much when there is considerable evidence indicating otherwise? In an elegant series of studies, Lau and colleagues have offered a novel answer to this long-standing question, proposing that our sense of visual richness is an artifact of decisional and metacognitive deficits. I critically evaluate this proposal and conclude that it rests on questionable presuppositions concerning the relationship between decisional and metacognitive processes, on one hand, and visual phenomenology, on the other.


Introduction

Contemporary discussions in philosophy, psychology, and vision science have been concerned with the sense of phenomenological richness associated with vision. As an illustration, consider the view from Coit Tower in San Francisco. On a sunny day, you can witness hundreds of buildings, towers, cars, and pedestrians from the top of the tower. Unlike the other sense modalities, vision is particularly well suited to revealing the richly detailed cityscape. From the top of the tower, I can smell little more than the ocean and hear only the bustle of passing cars. My senses of touch and taste are both too proximal in nature to reveal the distal landscape. It is only when I open my eyes that I am able to witness the breathtaking view of the city.

Nevertheless, the vision’s unique capacity to reveal the richly detailed world around us is quite puzzling given the battery of different limitations in the processing of visual information. To start, visual resolution is greatly limited in one’s periphery. This can be appreciated by noting that we cannot identify a playing card presented in the periphery (Dennett 1991) and fail to discern significant peripheral distortions in images (Anstis 1998; Freeman and Simoncelli 2011) [Note that these examples do not demonstrate that color vision is lacking in the periphery (cf. Schwitzgebel 2008; Lau and Rosenthal 2011; Cohen et al. 2016). When cortical magnification is controlled for, there are no significant differences between color vision in foveal and peripheral regions of the visual field (see Tyler 2015; Haun et al. 2017)]. A related phenomenon is visual crowding, which occurs when a target in the periphery is surrounded by distractors (i.e. “flankers”). Such targets are identifiable if displayed in isolation but are difficult to identify when placed in a crowded display (Whitney and Levi 2011). Finally, phenomena such as change and inattentional blindness show that if we are not paying attention to something, it is unlikely that we will notice it (Simons 2000; Simons and Ambinder 2005; Simons and Rensink 2005). Instead, we will often claim that we do not see it, even if we are staring right at it.

The foregoing remarks raise a puzzle: How do we seem to see so much when there is considerable evidence indicating otherwise? This vision science mystery has been the subject of a great deal of inquiry [O’Regan and Noë (2001; see also Noë 2002) argue that a puzzle only arises if one assumes that the richness associated with visual experience must be situated “in the head.” They suggest that the rich nature of visual phenomenology is explained by the fact that we have perceptual access to a richly detailed world. Block (2007) argues that the richness of visual experience is explained by the fact that visual experience outstrips or “overflows” the limits of cognitive access. On Block’s view, phenomena such as change and inattentional blindness reflect limitations on visual cognition, not visual experience. Cohen et al. (2016) have sought to answer the puzzle by appealing to summary (or “ensemble”) representations that provide a singular description of a group. It goes without saying that none of these proposals are uncontroversial.]. In an elegant series of studies, Lau and colleagues have offered a novel answer to this long-standing question. They have proposed that our sense of the richness of visual phenomenology is an artifact of decisional and metacognitive biases. As they put it, phenomenology is “subjectively inflated.” As we will see, the group provides evidence that subjective inflation occurs in conditions of peripheral vision, visual crowding, and reduced attention [A thorough summary of the evidence in favor of subjective inflation is detailed by Knotts et al. (2018).]. Given the rigorous psychophysical techniques employed by these researchers, the proposal should be taken seriously as a potential solution to one of the most unrelenting puzzles in vision science.

The aim of this article is to critically evaluate this proposal. After some clarificatory remarks concerning the nature of subjective inflation, I turn to the representative findings invoked to support the “inflation” view put forward by Lau and colleagues. I argue that Lau and colleagues’ interpretation of these findings rests on questionable presuppositions concerning the relationship between decisional and metacognitive processes, on one hand, and visual phenomenology, on the other.


Subjective Inflation

What exactly is “subjective inflation”? Lau and colleagues offer the following definition:

Inflation can be defined as the subjective overestimation of the reliability or quality of the sensory representations themselves … in inflation, the representations themselves are not necessarily filled in with details but are subjectively misestimated to be rich in content. Across the entire visual periphery, it is unlikely filling-in processes provide all the fine details in early sensory regions in a precise, pixelated representation instantly as soon as we view a scene (Odegaard et al. 2018, 2, citations omitted).

The latent assumption in this passage is that we seem to enjoy visual experiences that have precise, pixelated, and instantaneous richness. Lau and colleagues are taking this apparent snapshot-like richness of visual experience as their explanandum. According to Lau and colleagues, sensory representations or filling-in processes do not entirely account for this apparent richness (cf. Lau and Rosenthal 2011). Instead, this impression of snapshot-like richness must be rendered through an overestimation process that they refer to as “inflation.”

How is this last step supposed to work? Lau and Brown (2019, 6–7) say that inflation increases the “strength” or “level” of phenomenology, making it “richer” and “more vivid.” It is plausible that one’s sense of subjective presence can vary in strength. The Kanizsa Triangle in provides a nice illustration. It is easy enough to appreciate that the modally completed triangle in the foreground of the image has a stronger subjective presence than the amodally completed triangle in the background. One reason for this is that there is both boundary and featural completion in the case of the modally completed triangle, whereas this is lacking in the case of the amodally completed triangle (see Pessoa et al. 1998). Both the modally and amodally completed triangle have a weaker subjective presence than the non-completed triangle in. Perhaps we should think of subjective inflation as in some way strengthening subjective presence [This is not to say that the neural mechanisms underlying subjective inflation and perceptual completion will overlap (see Odegaard et al. 2018).].

It is worth flagging that a latent assumption underlying the present discussion—that visual experience seems to have a snapshot-like richness—is not universally accepted. Noë (2002) argues that such a characterization of visual experience subverts visual phenomenology. As he puts it, such a “… snapshot conception of visual experience… is not one to which perceivers themselves are committed. Perhaps it is an idea about the perception that psychologists or philosophers find natural. Perhaps it is way of describing experience that many ordinary perceivers would be inclined to assent to if they were asked appropriately leading questions. But this is compatible with its being the case that we do not really take our experience to be this way” (2002, 4–5). Although Lau and colleagues never explicitly endorse the snapshot conception, it is widely and implicitly presupposed (cf. Cohen et al. 2016), and the snapshot conception may be motivating the inflation view. In any case, I set this issue aside for the remainder of the discussion.

Talk of “subjective inflation” is ambiguous between two different interpretations. On a “visual inflation” interpretation, visual phenomenology is altered by decisional and metacognitive deficits. For instance, if visual inflation occurs, a liberal detection bias for a certain class of stimuli would generate an inflated visual sense of the presence of those stimuli. On a “cognitive inflation” interpretation, these deficits alter one’s cognitive (but not visual) phenomenology. Extending the previous example, if cognitive inflation occurs, a liberal detection bias for a certain class of stimuli would generate an inflated cognitive sense of the presence of those stimuli, perhaps through the formation of a conscious belief. These two options are not exhaustive. A further option would be to claim that these deficits have no phenomenological effects whatsoever; yet, this would not be a kind of subjective inflation.

Lau and colleagues clearly have visual inflation in mind when discussing subjective inflation. For instance, one study by the group is concerned with the possibility that “…liberal biases reflect inflated visual phenomenology” (Li et al. 2018, 1326). Another is entitled: “A Decisional Account of Subjective Inflation of Visual Perception at the Periphery”, where the focus is on “…subjective inflation at the perceptual level” (Solovey et al. 2015, 268). Similar remarks can be found in the other studies used to support the inflation view.

It is worth noting one additional ambiguity in the inflation view. The proposal leaves open two ways of interpreting the relation between visual phenomenology, on the one hand, and various decisional and metacognitive processes, on the other. On the “causal” interpretation, decisional and metacognitive processes cause visual phenomenology to be inflated. Accordingly, decisional and metacognitive processes enjoy a distinct existence from visual phenomenology; nevertheless, these processes systematically affect visual phenomenology, making visual inflation into a kind of cognitive penetration. On the “constitutive” interpretation, decisional and metacognitive processes partially constitute visual phenomenology. On this interpretation (but not on the causal interpretation), part of what it is to have inflated visual phenomenology is to have liberal decisional and/or metacognitive biases. It seems to me that Lau and colleagues have the constitutive interpretation in mind, and I will proceed on the basis of this assumption. That said, the issues I raise apply even if the causal interpretation is accepted.


Evidence for the Inflation View

I now critically evaluate evidence in favor of the inflation view, suggesting that it is equivocal. If I am correct, we ought to adopt a position of agnosticism as to whether visual inflation occurs. To begin, consider a recent peripheral vision study by the group, in which subjects were required to perform a simple stimulus detection task (Solovey et al. 2015). The stimuli could be presented in either foveal or peripheral regions of each subject’s visual field. As expected, detection sensitivity was lower for stimuli presented in the periphery. To provide an adequate comparison, experimenters increased the contrast of the peripheral stimuli so that perceptual sensitivity was matched between foveal and peripheral stimulus presentations. The interesting finding was that, relative to foveal stimuli, subjects were more likely to indicate that they saw a peripheral stimulus in both stimulus-present and stimulus-absent trials (i.e. they exhibited a liberal detection bias for peripheral stimuli). This effect persisted even after giving trial-by-trial feedback, suggesting that it does not reflect a deliberate response strategy. This result has recently been extended to unattended, peripheral stimuli displayed in naturalistic settings (Li et al. 2018). Lau and colleagues claim that these results “…support the idea that in everyday visual experience, there is subjective inflation of experienced detail in the periphery, which may happen at the decisional level” (Li et al. 2018, 1325).

Suppose we take the main finding of this study—that subjects exhibit liberal detection biases for peripheral stimuli despite trial-by-trial feedback—at face value. It is often assumed that detection biases reflect post-perceptual processes and, as such, would not be taken as evidence in favor of visual inflation. Suppose for a moment that this was correct. Would the story be any different for liberal detection biases that are resistant to feedback? Lau and colleagues seem to think so, claiming that “these results may intrinsically reflect the perceptual experience of peripheral vision, because they were robustly replicated even under trial-by-trial feedback” (Solovey et al. 2015, 268; see also Knotts et al. 2018). It is true that many cognitive biases can be adjusted in light of new evidence. Yet, a range of biases that are clearly cognitive in nature, such as racist, religious, and superstitious biases, are also resistant to feedback, at least to a degree that they cannot be dismantled over the course of a few short hours. My deeply superstitious friend will knock on wood no matter how much evidence you provide in favor of the causal inefficacy of the act. Why think that liberal detection biases that are resistant to feedback are any different?

Lau and colleagues cite a paper by Witt et al. (2015) as evidence that “…detection biases could in principle reflect both subjective perception and decisional or response strategies…” (Li et al. 2018, 1325–1326). It is worth emphasizing that Witt and colleagues are making a largely technical point. They argue that sensitivity (dʹ) and criterion (c and β) measures from signal detection theory are terms of art that do not always neatly map onto perceptual and decisional processes, respectively:

While it is true that a change in decision processes will, all else being equal, affect a criterion measure (such as c or β), it is not true that a change in the criterion measure necessarily implies a change in decision processes. Similarly, while a change in d′ can imply an effect on perception, it is not true that the absence of an effect on d′ implies the absence of a perceptual effect. Even when d′ remains constant, a perceptual effect can be quite large and show up as a large (and selective) change in the criterion measure across conditions (Witt et al. 2015, 289).

Yet, Lau and colleagues are not making an interpretive point about the criterion measure in signal detection theory. In fact, they appear to accept the orthodox construal of the criterion measure. They suggest that decisional and/or metacognitive processes underlie the liberal detection biases exhibited by subjects in their experiments (Li et al. 2018, 1331) and claim their study provides “…evidence that participants adopted more liberal criteria for making detection judgments when the target was unattended and presented in periphery” (Li et al. 2018, 1329). The tendentious claim underlying inflation views is that decisional and/or metacognitive processes can generate inflated visual phenomenology. The consideration raised by Witt and colleagues—that the criterion measure may in certain circumstances reflect a perceptual process—is orthogonal to this claim.

If Lau and colleagues were to claim that the liberal criteria effects were a result of a perceptual process, abandoning their claim that decisional and/or metacognitive processes underlie these criteria effects, it would be unclear how their position differed from a proposal according to which rich perceptual phenomenology is the result of the perceptual system “filling-in” details in unattended, crowded, and peripheral regions. However, Lau and colleagues are very clear that their proposal is supposed to be distinct from a filling-in proposal (Odegaard et al. 2018, 2).

Lau (personal correspondence) maintains that the decisional and/or metacognitive processes in question may nonetheless count as perceptual. On this line of thought, there is a decisional component to perception. This recommendation is in broad accordance with the constitutive interpretation of the inflation view. Such a rejoinder is difficult to dispute. At the same time, it is unclear whether this recommendation is at all substantive. If, on one hand, the point is that there is a liberal sense of the term ‘perception’ whose extension includes decisional and/or metacognitive processes, then the inflation view is merely advocating a prescriptive change in the terminology of psychology, not offering novel evidence aimed at explaining the apparent richness of visual phenomenology.

If, on the other hand, there is some additional argument or evidence to be given in favor of the claim that there is a decisional component to perception, then it ought to be spelled out explicitly by proponents of the inflation view. It is of no help to simply cite that there is no perception without decision as a kind of axiom. It is also of no help to appeal to the success of signal detection theory for support. Although the notion of a perceptual decision does play a central role in signal detection theory, the notion is ambiguous between a detection or discrimination process that is intraperceptual and one that is post-perceptual. On the former interpretation, a perceptual decision is a detection or discrimination decision literally made by the perceptual system. On the latter interpretation, a perceptual decision is a post-perceptual detection or discrimination decision formed on the basis of information provided by the perceptual system. Only the intraperceptual interpretation supports the idea that perception has a decisional component. Why should we favor the intraperceptual over the post-perceptual interpretation?

On that note, liberal detection biases are not the only form of evidence that have been used to support the inflation view. Consider a task by Odegaard et al. (2018) which required subjects to discriminate the orientation of visually crowded or uncrowded stimuli. Following each trial, subjects provided scaled ratings corresponding to how confident they were in their perceptual judgments. Although discrimination sensitivity was lower in crowded than in uncrowded conditions, confidence ratings were higher (More specifically, across trials in which subjects discriminated orientation incorrectly, confidence ratings were significantly higher in crowded than in uncrowded conditions. Across correct trials, confidence ratings were approximately equal.). Using a measure of metacognitive efficiency known as the “M-ratio,” experimenters showed that subjects’ confidence ratings did not effectively track their accuracy on the task, exhibiting a form perceptual decision-making that is suboptimal from a purely decision-theoretic point of view [Indeed, suboptimal perceptual decision making is quite common (for an extensive review, see Rahnev and Denison 2018).]. The Lau and colleagues take these results to show that “… far from perceiving [crowded stimuli in] the visual periphery with a high degree of fidelity, our subjective sense of the visual surround is inflated” (Odegaard et al. 2018, 7, citations omitted). The idea is that subjects’ erroneous overconfidence in crowded conditions—which drives the reduction in metacognitive efficiency—is evidence for visual inflation.

Again, however, it is unclear why confidence provides evidence in favor of visual inflation. Conceptually, confidence concerning one’s perceptual judgments appears doubly dissociable from visual phenomenology. Some subject S might be quite confident in their perceptual judgments concerning some stimulus k even when k is not visually experienced by S. For example, if S holds their eyes firmly shut, then k will not be visually experienced by S no matter how confident S is in their perceptual judgments concerning k. Furthermore, S may be entirely lacking in confidence concerning their perceptual judgments without any effect whatsoever on visual phenomenology. A student deep in the thick of Cartesian skepticism may lack confidence in all their perceptual judgments, but it would be preposterous to claim that reading Descartes might render one visually impaired.

Lau and colleagues may find these examples unconvincing, discounting them as limit cases. Nevertheless, the more pressing question remains: Why think that a high level of confidence implies anything about visual phenomenology? If Lau and colleagues are to avoid giving a question-begging reply (viz., a reply that presupposes their favored higher-order thought theory of consciousness), they must provide some mediating link between confidence and visual phenomenology. Without any such link, it is not obvious why the previous study gives us reason to accept the inflation view.

Lau and colleagues appear to be aware of the tenuous relation between confidence and visual phenomenology. Citing an earlier replication of results similar to those of Solovey et al. (2015), they suggest that “It is the joint observation, that peripheral perception leads to both erroneous overconfidence and liberal detection bias, that led us to think these findings may be relevant for subjective [visual] phenomenology” (Odegaard et al. 2018, 8; see also Lau and Brown 2019). Yet, as noted above, liberal detection biases also fail to provide univocal evidence in favor of visual inflation. Therefore, such an appeal is of no use.

Lau and colleagues also mention blindsight—a neurophysiological disorder resulting from damage or destruction of the primary visual cortex (i.e. V1) which appears to disrupt visual awareness while leaving certain perceptual capacities intact—as a case in which confidence provides a useful means of assessing whether visual awareness is present or absent (Odegaard et al. 2018, 8). In support of this claim, they cite an article by Ko and Lau (2012) which characterizes blindsight using a signal detection theoretic framework. On this framework, certain “essential” psychological properties of blindsight patients are explained by their poor metacognitive capacities. What are these “essential” psychological properties of blindsight? As Ko and Lau put it:

Although we are interested in the nature of the conscious experience in blindsight, this is hard to define clearly and is therefore less suitable to be the target of explanation for a formal computational theory. Fortunately, blindsight is a well-studied phenomenon. This means we can focus on certain patterns of behavior that presumably reflect the disturbed nature of conscious awareness (Ko and Lau 2012, 1402).

The “patterns of behavior” in question are none other than detection/discrimination criterion responses and confidence ratings. In other words, Ko and Lau assume, without any argument, that criterion responses and confidence ratings are an effective means of assessing the visual phenomenology of blindsight patients. In turn, Ko and Lau go on to provide an explanation as to why blindsight patients exhibit such patterns of behavior, an explanation that appeals to their impaired metacognitive capacities. What is important for our purposes is that, in the present dialectical context, invoking Ko and Lau’s signal detection theory framework to argue for a link between confidence and visual phenomenology is circular. The framework presupposes that confidence is an effective means of assessing visual phenomenology.

Notwithstanding, the case of blindsight might be taken to provide inductive support in favor of the existence of a link between confidence and visual consciousness if one antecedently assumes that visual awareness is impaired in blindsight patients. However, even if this is right, a lack of confidence and an absence of visual phenomenology might be coextensive in blindsight patients for reasons that are of no help to the inflation view. Ignoring any counterexamples that may arise, we might grant that, ceteris paribus, visual consciousness engenders confidence (The ceteris paribus clause is intended to exclude cases such as the Cartesian skepticism example given above. I take it that providing a more substantive, non-circular characterization of this clause would be quite challenging.). Ordinarily, when I enjoy a visual experience as of a scruffy dog in front of me, I become more confidence that there is a scruffy dog in front of me. It would follow that, ceteris paribus, my lack of confidence that there is a scruffy dog in front of me makes it doubtful that I enjoy a visual experience as of a scruffy dog.

These considerations are all compatible with a relatively uncontroversial, unidirectional link between confidence and visual consciousness: confidence often flows from visual consciousness. Such a unidirectional link captures the sentiment that:

…it is…unclear whether conscious experiences regarding a perceptual object can ever occur without any introspectable sense of certainty that something is presented to us. This is not at all to say that subjective confidence is equivalent to conscious perception, only that the latter entails at least some degree of the former (Odegaard et al. 2017, 9596, citations omitted).

Yet, from the simple observation that visual consciousness is often a source of confidence, one cannot justifiably infer changes in the strength or level of visual phenomenology from increases in confidence. After all, visual consciousness is just one of many different sources of confidence. One possible reason why subjects in the experiment might be overconfident in their ability to discriminate crowded stimuli is that they can often discriminate objects surrounded by other objects in non-laboratory settings: they simply need to move their eyes and fixate them. Another possible reason for subjects’ overconfidence in the experiment is that they may stubbornly, tacitly, and wrongly believe that peripheral vision tasks are easy. Such a belief might even be highly resistant to feedback, much like a superstitious belief. Again, the evidence is equivocal.

To my knowledge, the most direct evidence for visual inflation comes from one of the group’s studies concerning attention (Rahnev et al. 2011). This perceptual discrimination task required subjects to discern the tilt of gratings that either did or did not receive an attentional precue. Participants gave higher-visibility ratings to gratings that did not receive an attentional precue, relative to those gratings that did receive a precue, when discrimination sensitivity was matched between these two cuing conditions. (Discrimination sensitivity was matched by increasing the contrast of the uncued gratings.) Again, these effects were not eliminated by giving trial-by-trial feedback or by changing the task payoff. These results are taken to indicate that visual inflation occurs in the absence of focal attention (see also Lau and Rosenthal 2011).

Although visibility and confidence ratings diverge in a handful of detection and discrimination tasks [see, e.g. Sandberg et al. (2010) and Rausch and Zehetleitner (2016), respectively], these ratings usually correlate. In some circumstances, it is likely that visibility ratings are notational variants of confidence ratings. As Block (2019) puts it: “It is often said that when you give subjects a 4-point rating scale it doesn’t much matter whether you ask them to rate visibility or to rate confidence in their judgment. The pragmatic situation dominates the responses independently of exactly what the ratings are supposed to mean.” Thus, the use of visibility rather than confidence ratings in this study may be, at most, a superficial difference. One prediction of this claim is that similar results should obtain if the visibility ratings in this study were replaced by confidence ratings. A study by Rahnev et al. (2012) at least partially vindicates this prediction by showing that higher confidence ratings are given in a motion discrimination task when pre-stimulus neural activity is reduced in the dorsal attentional network, which likely reflects reduced task-related attention by the study’s participants.

In fact, Lau and colleagues might very well agree that visibility and confidence ratings are only nominally different. This is because they propose that both visibility and confidence ratings are, in essence, decision criteria effects (see Rahnev et al. 2011, supplement). As they put it, “the criteria for high visibility rating in discrimination should behave similarly to the criterion for detection” (Rahnev et al. 2011, 1514). That is, much like a detection criterion, visibility ratings reflect a process in which a response is made when an internal signal passes some decisional threshold. The upshot is that visibility ratings provide no additional support for inflation view unless one antecedently accepts a substantive assumption concerning the relation between decisional and/or metacognitive processes, and visual phenomenology, which is precisely what is under dispute (Of course, this study does provide additional data in support of the claim that some (subjective or non-subjective) form of inflation occurs).

To be clear, I am not suggesting that visibility ratings are useless to a science of consciousness. Rather, my suggestion is that we should question whether high visibility ratings are an indicator of apparent visibility if they are, at bottom, just decision criteria effects—as Lau and colleagues readily admit. This hesitancy to take visibility ratings at face value is not revolutionary: we would never take visibility ratings seriously if they were the result of experimenter bias, for instance.


Conclusion

I conclude that, despite its ingenuity, the inflation view rests on evidence that is ripe for reinterpretation. All the results taken to support the inflation view are consistent with a view according to which decisional and metacognitive processes do not increase the strength of subjective presence in visual experience. It follows that, without additional evidence or argument, we ought to remain agnostic about the inflation view. This holds true despite the fact that the studies discussed use superficially different subjective measures (e.g. “yes-no” responses, confidence ratings, visibility ratings).

Much of the present discussion is an instance of a more general problem for the scientific study of consciousness: How do we effectively measure a subject’s conscious experience? As our discussion illustrates, this methodological question arises forcefully when subjective measures of consciousness, such as visibility ratings, conflict with objective measures, such as discrimination sensitivity. At this point, there is a lack of agreement as to how conflicts between different measures of consciousness ought to be resolved (see Seth et al. 2008; Sandberg et al. 2010; Irvine 2013).

There are other lingering questions that we have not addressed. Why do we exhibit liberal detection biases for peripheral stimuli? Why are we overconfident in our capacity to discriminate crowded and unattended stimuli? Notice that the inflation view does not itself provide an explanation of these findings (Inflation is, by definition, a process of overestimating our sensitivity to such stimuli, so it would be question begging—in the philosophers’ sense—to explain such findings by appealing to inflation, in much the same way that it would be question begging to attempt to explain opium’s tendency to cause people to sleep by appealing to its “dormitive virtue”). Rather, the inflation view (purports to) explain the apparent richness of perceptual experience, drawing on these findings for support.

One potential explanation, favored by several proponents of the inflation view, is that these findings stem from an inflexibility in perceptual decision-making. An issue with this proposal is that the results of the detection and discrimination tasks used in support of inflexible perceptual decision-making models [e.g. the “common criterion” models of Gorea and Sagi (2000), Rahnev et al. (2011), and Morales et al. (2015)] can be fit equally well to models in which perceptual decision-making is flexibly updated (see Denison et al. 2018, supplement). Indeed, the results of a more recent perceptual categorization task which avoids this underdetermination problem are at odds with at least some of the predictions of inflexible perceptual decision-making models (Denison et al. 2018). Although there is clearly more to say on this topic, if the present considerations are correct, it is questionable whether visual consciousness will play a central role.


Information generation as a functional basis of consciousness

Ryota Kanai, Acer Chang, Yen Yu, Ildefons Magrans de Abril, Martin Biehl, Nicholas Guttenberg — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6884095, CC BY 4.0.

What is the biological advantage of having consciousness? Functions of consciousness have been elusive due to the subjective nature of consciousness and ample empirical evidence showing the presence of many nonconscious cognitive performances in the human brain. Drawing upon empirical literature, here, we propose that a core function of consciousness be the ability to internally generate representations of events possibly detached from the current sensory input. Such representations are constructed by generative models learned through sensory-motor interactions with the environment. We argue that the ability to generate information underlies a variety of cognitive functions associated with consciousness such as intention, imagination, planning, short-term memory, attention, curiosity, and creativity, all of which contribute to non-reflexive behavior. According to this view, consciousness emerged in evolution when organisms gained the ability to perform internal simulations using internal models, which endowed them with flexible intelligent behavior. To illustrate the notion of information generation, we take variational autoencoders (VAEs) as an analogy and show that information generation corresponds the decoding (or decompression) part of VAEs. In biological brains, we propose that information generation corresponds to top-down predictions in the predictive coding framework. This is compatible with empirical observations that recurrent feedback activations are linked with consciousness whereas feedforward processing alone seems to occur without evoking conscious experience. Taken together, the information generation hypothesis captures many aspects of existing ideas about potential functions of consciousness and provides new perspectives on the functional roles of consciousness.

Keywords: consciousness, imagery, qualia, theories and models, computational modeling


What Is the Function of Consciousness?

The notion that consciousness is a natural phenomenon suggests that consciousness is subject to a set of universal laws of nature, and a scientific theory of consciousness should correctly identify physical or information-theoretic conditions in which consciousness occurs (Chalmers 1993). This implies that biological brains are not the only medium that gives rise to consciousness. Any physical system that satisfies the necessary and sufficient condition for generating consciousness should possess internal experience (Searle 2017). However, those conditions have been difficult to determine due to the subjective nature of conscious experience.

Consciousness has both functional and subjective aspects (Block 1995). The functional aspect, also known as access consciousness, is the objectively observable aspect of consciousness, which are amenable to scientific scrutiny, while the subjective aspect, known as phenomenal consciousness, is not directly observable except for the person experiencing that conscious state. Understanding how phenomenal consciousness occurs within physical systems is known as the Hard problem of consciousness (Chalmers 1997) and is considered to be one of the toughest problems in science. Much of the interest devoted to possible solutions to the Hard problem often results in the views that consciousness is epiphenomenal, i.e., that subjective experiences exist only as a by-product of information processing without playing any functional role (Velmans 1991). Instead of directly addressing the Hard problem, a possibly more productive direction might be to consider putative functions of consciousness, namely, cognitive functions that require consciousness in the sense of being awake and able to report stimulus contents with confidence. Here, we consider consciousness both in terms of the state of consciousness (e.g. wakefulness) and the contents of consciousness (e.g. awareness of specific sensory stimuli).

In this Opinion article, we examine possible functions of consciousness in the current literature of neuroscience and psychology, and propose that information generation of possibly counterfactual representations is the core faculty of consciousness. Traditionally, many high-level cognitive functions have been associated with consciousness. However, more recent studies have uncovered cognitive functions such as attention (Kanai et al. 2006; Bahrami et al. 2007; Koch and Tsuchiya 2007; Hsieh et al. 2011), working memory (Soto et al. 2011; King et al. 2016), and executive control (Lau and Passingham 2007) can be performed in the absence of conscious awareness (Lin and He 2009). Those empirical findings have made it difficult to pin down cognitive functions that require consciousness. What then is the critical function that requires consciousness? In the literature, there have been a few suggestions for cognitive functions that seem to require conscious awareness (Dehaene et al. 2017).


Consciousness Is for Non-Reflexive Behavior


Reflexive versus non-reflexive behavior as a marker of consciousness

In clinical settings, the ability to execute non-reflexive behavior is taken as a sign of the presence of consciousness when distinguishing disorders of consciousness (Piccinini and Craver 2011): the minimally conscious state (MCS) in which the patient is awake and retains awareness of the self and environment, and the unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (Laureys et al. 2010) in which the patient is awake but lacks awareness of the self and environment. According to a modern guideline, MCS is characterized by the presence of cognitively mediated behavior, which is differentiated from reflexive behavior (Giacino et al. 2002). That is, in disorders of consciousness, the presence of consciousness depends on intentional, deliberate behavior as opposed to automated, reflexive behavior triggered solely by the properties of the current sensory input. While identification of non-reflexive behavior is difficult if we were to rely only on behavioral characteristics displayed by a patient, this clinical definition appeals to our intuition that consciousness is needed in non-reflexive behavior.


Bridging a temporal gap in classical conditioning

Trace conditioning is a kind of classical conditioning which pairs conditioned stimulus (CS) such as a tone with unconditioned stimulus (US), which evoked a response such as an eyeblink from air puffs to the eye. Classical conditioning is said to be a trace conditioning when CS and US do not overlap in time as opposed to a delay conditioning in which CS and US overlap in time. Crucially, empirical evidence suggests that successful trace conditioning requires awareness of the relationship between CS and US, whereas delay conditioning occurs automatically regardless of whether the subject became aware of the relationship (Clark and Squire 1998; Clark et al. 2002).

The important difference is that in trace conditioning, the subject needs to bridge the temporal gap between CS and US by retaining the information of CS over a blank period. However, the brain cannot prepare automated circuits to associate all possible arbitrary combinations of temporally segregated events, because the number of combinations increases when we consider many different gap durations. Specifically, the information about the CS needs to be maintained over time in the brain to be associated with the neural activity evoked by the US. Therefore, the CS needs to be selected as such from many other possible stimuli. That is to say, the subject needs to form a hypothesis about the relationship between CS and US. This contrasts with delay conditioning in which the temporal overlaps allow neural activities evoked by CS and US to directly interact with each other without an additional mechanism to sustain information from the past. As such, the subject does not need to pick a stimulus as a CS to maintain over a short time period. These considerations based on findings in associative learning studies suggest that a possible function of consciousness is to bridge a temporal gap by selecting a small number of events.


Delayed response in a patient with agnosia

Another clue comes from experiments on the agnosia patient DF who had impairments in conscious object recognition (Goodale et al. 1991). When she was asked to indicate the orientation of a slanted slit verbally or by adjusting a handle, she could not report the orientation, suggesting that she had no awareness of the orientation. However, she could post a letter through the slit by adjusting the orientation of the letter in the right angle, suggesting that she could use the orientation information for guiding action. This is a classic example that led to the proposal that the ventral pathway (where the patinet DF had a damage) is for conscious vision, whereas the dorsal pathway is for guiding action without necessarily evoking conscious experience.

Crucially, when she was shown the slot first, and then the light was turned off so that she would have to wait for a few seconds before acting, then she failed to reach the slot correctly (Goodale et al. 1994; but see Hesse and Schenk 2014). This suggests that the unconscious action system needs to be guided online by visual information and to act on offline information retained from the recent past requires the ability to consciously perceive the shape. In other words, “online systems” that process information real time works without awareness, but to maintain information over time, consciousness is necessary.

These examples suggest that a possible function of consciousness might be to maintain sensory information in short-term memory in a flexible, usable form over a period of time after the stimulus is no longer present. Indeed, based on such observations, Koch proposed a delay test for consciousness in biological systems where the presence of consciousness is assessed by the ability to perform a task when a temporal gap is inserted between a stimulus and an action (Koch 2004).

This is in line with the second and the third laws of the three laws of qualia—a framework proposed by Ramachandran and Hirstein (1997). “Qualia” refers to the qualitative aspect of conscious experience, which is sometimes characterized as the redness of a sunset or the painfulness of headache (Kanai and Tsuchiya 2012). In the three laws of qualia, qualia are characterized by three functional properties, namely, (i) irrevocability, (ii) flexibility, and (iii) short-term memory. Irrevocability refers to the observation that we cannot override the contents of experience at will via top-down attention. Flexibility implies the fact that once sensory events are consciously registered, the contents can be used for multiple, open-ended purposes unlike reflexive behavior. Short-term memory refers to the fact that the content of consciousness remains for a sufficient time to allow interaction with the executive system for making choices.


Counterfactual predictions for intention and planning

Another important aspect of consciousness pertains to motor behavior such as intention or planning. Intention can be formulated as predictions about the consequences of actions before those actions are executed (Jeannerod 1994). For example, I can predict my sensory inputs from visual and somatosensory systems that would arise if I were to make a particular action such as waving my hand in front of my face even without actually performing the movement. I can also think about going to the kitchen to make coffee without actually standing up from the couch in the living room. These instances of intention or planning are counterfactual predictions in the sense that planned actions have not materialized in the reality while imagining a possible future.

The importance of consciousness in planning has been argued in the literature. More than 20 years ago, Crick and Koch discussed plausible functions of visual awareness are to produce the best interpretation of the current scene, and to make the information available for voluntary actions after a delay (Crick and Koch 1995). Based on this view, they once proposed that neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) do not directly produce conscious experience (Crick and Koch 1995). The rationale for the V1 hypothesis comes from the consideration that the biological utility of conscious perception is to make the sensory information available for planning and executing voluntary motor outputs. When we consciously experience sensory information (e.g. seeing a red ball), we can use that information for multiple purposes such as planning future actions. Crucially, the V1 hypothesis predicted that neuronal activities in V1 do not directly contribute to conscious experience because V1 neurons do not directly project to the prefrontal cortex implicated in the function of planning. While the position of one of the original proposers may have changed (Koch et al. 2016), we believe that the rationale that a functional consequence of conscious perception is the availability of the information for future planning is still valid independent of his current position.

The idea is also compatible with the current global workspace theory in which the role of consciousness is to make sensory information shared across multiple cortical regions including the fronto-parietal networks (Baars 1997, Dehaene et al. 1998; Dehaene and Naccache 2001). The key idea is that consciousness allows one to utilize the content of conscious perception for flexible purposes (Earl 2014). These hypotheses put emphasis on short-term memory, working memory, planning and executive control as functional capabilities endowed by consciousness. In other words, a function of consciousness is to make information globally available across the system.

Another possible role of consciousness is metacognition. A wide range of cognitive functions are known to be performed without awareness. As psychophysical and neurological studies have shown, objective performance in a visual task can be above chance while the subject claims to have no awareness of seeing a stimulus. Thus, it is thought that a higher-level, meta-representation of a first-order representation of a sensory stimulus should be needed for consciousness. This idea is closely related to the notion of higher-order theories of consciousness (Carruthers 2005; Rosenthal 2006; Lau and Rosenthal 2011). In line with higher-order theories, confidence ratings are often used as a proxy measure for the presence of conscious perception (Fleming and Lau 2014; Sherman et al. 2015).

These two aspects of consciousness, i.e., broadcasting of information and metacognition, have been summarized in a recent paper (Dehaene et al. 2017) as C1 and C2, respectively. The functions of consciousness discussed in this Opinion article mainly concerns C1, and our information generation hypothesis proposes that what underlies a variety of cognitive functions such as short-term memory, intention, and planning is the capability of generating fictional representations using internal, sensorimotor models.

Taken together, we propose that a key function of consciousness is to allow non-reflexive behavior such as responding after a delay, or executing an action based on internally generated plans. Is there a computational mechanism that is common across a variety of non-reflexive behavior?


Counterfactual Information Generation Theory of Consciousness

Here, we suggest that a common thread across those examples of non-reflexive behavior is information generation. It’s the ability to internally generate sensory representations that are not direct reflections of the current sensory input. They could be counterfactual representations since information maintained over time in short-term memory from the past or predictions of sensory consequences of unexecuted future actions do not necessarily correspond to events actually happening in the present environment.

Our hypothesis is that this ability to generate possibly counterfactual representations using internal models learned through interactions with the environment is the function of consciousness. This hypothesis, which we call information generation hypothesis, helps us understand functional advantages of consciousness and predict under what kind of tasks consciousness would be required.

The ability to generate internal representations independent of current sensory inputs allows an agent to engage with possibly counterfactual states not happening at the present moment. This enables an agent to detach itself from the environment and perform non-reflexive behavior such as planning future actions through mental simulations of the environment (Grush 2004). Furthermore, it allows an agent even to learn from fictional scenarios it has never experienced (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018). This capability provides an enormous advantage to organisms for survival.


Counterfactuals in model-based reinforcement learning

The functional advantage of internal simulation is also apparent in reinforcement learning. In the literature of reinforcement learning, learning strategy is divided into model-free and model-based (Dayan and Berridge 2014). Model-free reinforcement learning such as Q-learning learns to derive the best action under the current state but does not involve direct learning of the structure of the environment. Model-based reinforcement learning captures the sequential contingencies of events and actions, namely, the predictive model of future states for a given action. This model-based approach allows an agent to use the knowledge of the structure of the environment to plan a course of action. For example, a bird’s eye model of a maze would allow an agent to plan for the optimal path through an internal simulation. The model-based approach thus affords an agent with the ability to compute an optimal sequence of actions through mental simulation using their internal models. In both biological and artificial intelligence, generative models of action-state sequences play an essential role in model-based reinforcement learning. For example, Dyna proposed by Sutton (1991) adopts the idea that planning is “trying things in your head.” Crucially, the model-based approach allows an agent to adapt to new goals flexibly because it can use the internal model to optimize its behavior without trial and error.


Intrinsic motivation, saliency, and infotaxis

Predictions of future states are useful for sampling information from the environment efficiently. This is because such generated future states allow an agent to estimate various statistical quantities of interest in a given context. For example, an agent can compute in a model-based manner what would be the expected information gain (Schmidhuber 1991) or other forms of intrinsic motivation (Oudeyer 2007) in response to future (and therefore counterfactual) actions. The framework of active inference (Friston et al. 2012) promises to treat future actions in a similar way as other counterfactual events like hidden causes and infer them by conditioning on an optimized utility function. While this utility function usually corresponds to expected free energy it has been shown that the same approach can be equally applied to various other intrinsic motivations (Biehl et al. 2018). This suggests that the information generation perspective may be able to naturally incorporate current research on intrinsic motivations as well.

In the context of attention and eye movement, expected information gain can be considered as a saliency map (Friston et al. 2012). Such formulation is considered model-based in the sense that the saliency (i.e. expected decrease in the entropy of hidden states) is computed based on a generative model of the sensory input given the underlying hidden cause. Infotaxis is another such example where search behavior is guided by expected information gain given an action and is likely to be found in many creatures (Vergassola et al. 2007). These model-based search strategies are important when signals are sparse, and highlight the utility of counterfactual predictions in biological systems (Friston et al. 2015).

Taken together, our analysis suggests that the ability to generate information enables an agent to perform mental simulations for planning future action sequences, which would be otherwise difficult only with a collection of reflexive behaviors. This ability underlies model-based reinforcement learning and intrinsic motivations such as curiosity and infotaxis.


What Does It Mean to Internally Generate Information?

So far, we have argued that the ability to generate counterfactual representations is the core function of consciousness, allowing an agent to perform non-reflexive behaviors. However, we have not specified what kind of neural processing should be considered as generating information.

Here, we argue that information generation can be seen as production of sensory representations using internal models. This is achieved by reversing the process of representation learning, which is projection from sensory inputs to internal models. In what follows, we will illustrate the concept of information generation using modern approaches to constructing generative models with deep neural networks.


Generative models in deep neural networks

Many sophisticated methods such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Gulrajani et al. 2017; Hindupur 2017) or variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013) for training models for generating sensory representations have been developed in recent years, but they have not received sufficient attention in the context of neuroscience. While the concept of learning a generative model—statistical model of the process of how sensory data are generated from a set of hidden causes—is common in interpreting computational principles of the brain, what it means for the brain to use generative models for producing representations has rarely been considered. Here, we illustrate the idea of information generation using the (variational) autoencoder as a metaphor and relate it to the predictive coding architecture in the brain.

VAEs are a class of neural networks consisting of an encoder/inference network and a decoder/generative network. The encoder works as data compression by transforming the input data (e.g. image) to abstract, latent representations of low dimensionality (i.e. parameters of a Gaussian distribution). The decoder then converts the abstract representation back to the original data space as the output. The networks are trained so that the output matches the input as closely as possible, namely, maximizing the lower bound of the probability of generating real data samples. Once trained successfully, the decoder network can be used independently of the encoder network, and thus without the input, to generate representations in the data space. This property of the decoder network enables production of novel and counterfactual representations based on previous experiences. The loss function of VAE is known as the evidence lower bound and is related to in Friston’s free energy principle (Friston 2009).

Under the computational scheme of VAEs, the decoder/generative and encoder/inference networks correspond to the generation and processing of information, respectively. The decoder/generative network can be used for generating representations in the data space by choosing a state in the latent space, which allows production of counterfactual representations including those the agent has never encountered before. From the architecture of VAEs, we can formulate information generation in terms of mapping from an abstract low-dimensional representation to a high-dimensional representation in the data (i.e. sensory) space.


Predictive coding framework of the brain

However, the architecture of the VAEs does not resemble the networks found in the biological brain. How do those encoder and decoder networks in VAEs correspond to the network architectures in biological brains? To establish correspondences with the brain, we consider hierarchical predictive coding (Rao and Ballard 1999; Friston and Kiebel 2009; Hohwy 2014). According to this view, representations at a higher layer serve as a prediction for a lower layer, and this is communicated via top-down signals, whereas prediction errors (i.e. the discrepancy between the top-down prediction and bottom-up signals) are communicated back to the higher layer to update the prediction.

At a conceptual level, the reciprocal interactions between top-down prediction and bottom-up prediction error in the predictive coding framework can be roughly mapped to the decoder and encoder in VAEs, respectively. While whether the brain utilizes the predictive coding architecture is still a matter of debate, and there are multiple ways to implement similar architectures (e.g. Heeger 2017), the framework provides a link between the encoder/decoder scheme presented above and possible counterparts in the biological brain. That is, information generation, which we claim to be crucial for consciousness, is mediated by top-down prediction, whereas the bottom-up message passing of prediction errors corresponds to encoding (or data compression). By interpreting feedback predictions as information generation, our current hypothesis predicts that consciousness is generated by the feedback predictions. This is in line with multiple observations that reports of conscious perception is associated with additional feedback activations from higher sensory areas to lower sensory areas (Lamme et al. 2000; Supèr et al. 2001; Manita et al. 2015).

Note, however, that information generation could in principle occur both in feedforward and feedback networks, as the example of VAE consists of purely feedforward networks. Recurrent connections are just a specific case of implementing information generation in the brain and are not a prerequisite for information generation. Therefore, the information generation hypothesis predicts that consciousness could be also produced in simple networks like the VAE as long as they generate information (see next section for a related issue). While we acknowledge that some readers might find it unlikely that such a simple network possesses consciousness, we leave this possibility open for future discussion.


Information generation from an intrinsic perspective

We have attributed information generation to the decoder/generative network in VAEs and top-down feedback in predictive coding networks. However, these attributions are made from an extrinsic viewpoint. If we are given an arbitrary network of neurons, it would be difficult to determine which part of the network corresponds to a decoder or an encoder. Is there a principled way to determine whether a system is generating information? One noticeable characteristic that distinguishes the decoder network from the encoder network is that in the decoder, the network has a divergent structure from a low-dimensional representation to a higher dimensional representation, whereas in the encoder network, the network has a convergent structure. Further work is needed to determine which part of a network should be considered as generating information from an intrinsic perspective without requiring an extrinsic interpreter.


Related Theories

In this Opinion paper, we argued that a potential function of consciousness is to generate potentially counterfactual representations, and this function allows flexible response mechanisms for various forms of non-reflexive, goal-directed behavior. As discussed earlier, our idea is compatible with putative functions of consciousness proposed by various authors in the context of the global workspace theory (Dehaene et al. 1998; Baars 2005), V1 hypothesis (Crick and Koch 1995), and the three laws of qualia (Ramachandran and Hirstein 1997), in which flexible use of sensory information is thought to be a key element of consciousness. Also, a very similar idea has been proposed by Pennartz that consciousness is for deliberate decision making on goal-directed behavior requiring internal generation of representations (Pennartz 2018). In what follows, we briefly overview other theories that are relevant to our current hypothesis.


Semantic pointer competition

A notion similar to the decoder networks in our hypothesis has been proposed in the context of the semantic pointer competition (SPC) hypothesis (Thagard and Stewart 2014). SPC proposes that consciousness is supported by representations, semantic pointers, and competition among semantic pointers. In brief, SPC posits that neural representations constructed for each modality (e.g. sensory, motor, and emotional) are combined to form the so-called semantic pointer, which works as a symbol that bundles associated representations coming from multiple modalities. The content of consciousness is determined through competitive mechanisms among semantic pointers towards a limited capacity. In this hypothesis, semantic pointers play two functions. One is to make predictions/inferences about other semantic pointers and the other is to unpack specific contents in the representation coming from a specific modality. A key theoretical difference is that the information generation hypothesis claims that this unpacking process corresponds to the generation of conscious experience, whereas SPC takes the whole architecture consisting of the three components (i.e. representations, semantic pointers, and competition) to be the foundation of consciousness.


Regret

Frith and Metzinger (2016) proposed that a function of consciousness is associated with the notion of regret. Regret implies extension of the self across time because regret is about the action taken in the past or anticipation of regret in the future. This hypothesis built around the notion of regret also includes other functions of consciousness such as the ability to communicate subjective experience with others, the ability to distinguish the real present from imaginary possible desirable states as used in future planning, and persistence of the self across time through the model of the self. Information generation discussed in our paper should be considered as a way to implement mechanisms to compute regret through production of and interactions with counterfactual past and future. The ability to evaluate counterfactual regret would serve the purpose of learning causal relationship between action and consequences (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018).


Qualia: factual versus counterfactual representations

Several authors have argued that one important function of conscious experience is the ability to distinguish between representations of factual reality of the here and now and counterfactual possibilities (Gregory 1998; Kanai and Tsuchiya 2012; Frith and Metzinger 2016). While we have emphasized the link between potentially counterfactual representations and consciousness, conscious experience is more vivid for the actual sensory input. How can the information generation hypothesis explain the stronger conscious experience for factual events than those for counterfactual possibilities?

Our interpretation is that conscious experience of the current sensory input is also a product of the internal, generative models. But instead of generating counterfactual events, the same generative networks produce a representation of the current input. The differences in vividness of experience come from the differences in the degree of details produced by the generative models (D’Argembeau and Van der Linden 2006; Dijkstra et al. 2017; Pearson 2019). When counterfactual representations are generated (e.g. imagining a face), generative networks can specify only up to a certain level of details, whereas when bottom-up signals are available (e.g. seeing a face), generative networks can utilize those signals to produce representations with finer details. We speculate that this difference in the level of details in internally generated images corresponds to the differences in the vividness between actual and counterfactual experiences and serves the purpose of distinguishing factual and counterfactual representations.

Furthermore, there has been a suggestion that counterfactual representations implicit in the internal models of sensorimotor contingencies contribute to the “presence” of an object of perception (Seth 2014). According to this theory, the perceived presence associated with a stimulus is supported by counterfactually rich generative models that have learned sensorimotor contingencies. Given the importance of perceptual presence in conscious experience of here and now, numerous possibilities stored in the structure of the generative models may shape the ineffable richness of qualia.

However, vividness of experience does not always guarantee that the sensation reflects the reality. In situations such as visual illusions, hallucinations, and dreams, we can have vivid experience of counterfactual events in the sense that they are not veridical to the external physical reality. For example, experiences generated by hallucinations are vivid and therefore should be considered as qualia even though we know that they are internally generated and hence counterfactual. Thus, whether an experience counts as a quale is not determined by whether it is counterfactual or factual, but to what extent details of the experience are produced by generative models. This leads to an interpretation of why dreams feel more vivid than imagination. While dreaming, bottom-up signals would be missing due to the absence of input stimuli. Therefore, top-down generative signals can produce more details without interruptions from bottom-up signals which would be present during awake states. This would lead to higher degrees of details in generated images in dreams and hence more vivid sensation despite the fact that all the images are internally generated.


Relation to Integrated Information Theory

How is our hypothesis related to Integrated Information Theory (IIT) proposed by Tononi and colleagues (Tononi 2004, Oizumi et al. 2014, Tononi et al. 2016; Tajima and Kanai 2017)? The idea that information generation lies at the core of consciousness is compatible with the main tenet in IIT that consciousness is information. However, the notion of information generation is different between these two theories. In our information generation hypothesis, information generation refers to the offline use of generative models so that the agent can interact with potentially counterfactual situations. Therefore, the hypothesis assumes the presence of an internal model. On the other hand, information generation in the context of IIT is a more general concept in which information is generated due to a specific state of the system which is causally linked with the past and the future and hence possesses information about them. As such, IIT does not assume the presence of an internal model or any specific structure. However, a possible link between the two theories is that a system with the ability to engage in an internal simulation using internal models may also integrate information because internal simulations require a loop structure where generative models are used recursively, and internal models need to reflect the complex dynamics of the environment. Further research is needed to explore this possibility to establish the relationship between the two theories.


Algorithmic information theory of consciousness

Another information-theoretic approach to consciousness is Kolmogorov Theory (KT) of consciousness (Ruffini 2017). KT proposes consciousness is generated by compressive models of the world. This is similar to our theory in the sense that specific information processes in the internal models are associated with production of consciousness. However, a key difference from our hypothesis is that KT emphasizes the compression process performed by internal models. However, we argue that the compressive processes are not associated with consciousness, and instead decompression (i.e. generation) is linked with consciousness.


Origins of conscious mind

While consciousness and intelligence are generally distinguished as separate entities, our hypothesis suggests a possible link between the intelligent behavior endowed by flexible use of internal sensorimotor models and consciousness.

What is the functional benefit of having the ability to generate counterfactual representations? Dennett’s formulation of stages of evolution of minds (Dennett 1996) illustrates the benefit of counterfactuals in evolution and intelligence. Dennett proposed useful distinctions among different stages of the evolution of creatures. These include the following four types of creatures.

The first stage of creatures is called Darwinian. Darwinian creatures are the most primitive form of creatures. The organisms at this stage do not learn from experiences but have a fixed set of behaviors determined by their genetic composition. They adapt to the environment only as a species through natural selection and mutation to their genes. Thus, learning occurs at a population level but not as individual agents.

The second stage is called Skinnerian. Skinnerian creatures—named after the psychologist Skinner—learn from their own experience through associative learning. If a particular action led to a reward (e.g. food), then that action is reinforced, whereas an action that led to an aversive result will be avoided. Skinnerian creatures can adapt to the environment during the lifetime of individual organisms through trial and error. However, there is a limitation in that they can only learn from their own experiences. They would have to learn danger from surviving dangerous situations.

Then, there comes the third stage of creatures—Popperian creatures named after the philosopher Popper. They have internal simulation of the environment and select an action based on predictions about simulated consequences of repertoires of future action sequences. This ability allows Popperian creatures to learn from their simulated, counterfactual experience, and to select reasonable actions even in a new environment when their internal model approximates it reasonably well. Moreover, the ability to form counterfactual representations of sensory consequences contingent upon their future action is the core function of intention. The information generation theory of consciousness suggests that consciousness appears at this stage of the evolution of the mind. In other words, our theory suggests the origin of consciousness is the functional advantage of having counterfactual predictions using an internal model of the environment, as it allows Popperian creatures to simulate consequences of possible actions and avoid executing actions that could be dangerous for survival.

Finally, the fourth stage is called Gregorian. Gregorian creatures can learn from their cultural environment through words and language. This requires the ability to run a simulation of the environment using information they learned through books and the Internet. In Popperian creatures, internal models had to be built upon their own experiences. Gregorian creatures on the other hand can improve their internal models through communication with other agents, which endows them with an additional leverage of intelligence. Here, the ability to internally represent counterfactual states is a prerequisite.

Our current hypothesis predicts that the presence of consciousness should be measured by the presence of internal generative models of the environment and the self. Moreover, the hypothesis predicts that model-based action selection should require consciousness. Is model-based reinforcement learning or other forms of model-based decision making possible without consciousness? One important future direction suggested by these predictions is to establish a formal computational and experimental framework to determine whether a given system relies on information generated by its internal generative models. In the example of VAE, we argued that dimensional expansion might be the essence of information generation. However, we need to define information generation more formally as an intrinsic property of a system. Further work is needed to establish such formalisms.


Recapitulation

To recapitulate, we set off to identify functions of consciousness by examining cognitive tasks that appear to require consciousness. Based on a few examples such as trace conditioning and delayed, non-reflexive responses, we aimed to extract functional essences underlying those tasks, and hypothesized that a function of consciousness is to bridge the temporal gap by internally generating representations of stimuli that are no longer present in the proximal environment. While the hypothesis emphasized the counterfactual aspect of generated information, it considers the conscious perception of current stimuli also as a product of internal generation. To illustrate the processes underlying information generation, we discussed information generation in the decoder networks in VAEs and speculated that in the brain, feedback connections should correspond to such processes. Finally, we reversed the logic of necessity and sufficiency and postulated a stronger version of our hypothesis that a system with the ability to generate representations detached from the current sensory input must have consciousness.

Note that there are two levels of hypotheses within our information generation hypothesis. A weak version of the hypothesis simply claims that a function associated with conscious experience is to generate and maintain representations of events detached from the current sensory input. This version predicts that tasks in which correct responses are not immediately available thereby requiring interactions with internally generated representations depend on consciousness. In other words, the weaker version claims that information generation is necessary for a system to perform consciousness dependent tasks. As such, the ability to perform a task that require internal generation of information is considered as an indicator of consciousness.

On the other hand, a stronger version of the hypothesis goes further and predicts that machines with similar functionalities would also possess consciousness even if they are relatively simple to build. This implies that all tasks that require counterfactual information generation also require consciousness. Therefore, consciousness and counterfactual information generation cannot be distinguished and we consider them identical. In other words, the stronger version claims that counterfactual information generation is sufficient for a system to be conscious. While readers may find this possibility unlikely, we argue that this possibility should be left open for further studies and the conceptual distinction of the two versions of the hypothesis would be useful for further examining this hypothesis in light of future research.

In the present paper, we discussed functions of consciousness. However, the term “function” was used in two different senses, i.e., teleological functions and functions in the sense of (mechanistic) functionalism. To avoid confusion, we would like to clarify how these two meanings of function are related to the weaker and the stronger claim of the hypothesis discussed above. The weaker claim, namely, the necessity of information generation concerns the teleological, purpose-related functions of consciousness. We discussed task conditions in which the presence of consciousness is required for successful performance and argued that what is common among those conditions is the function to generate potentially counterfactual events internally using generative models. The stronger claim on the other hand concerns a form of functionalism (i.e. mechanistic functionalism) in which specific functional mechanisms of cognition correspond to conscious mind (Piccinini and Craver 2011). Specifically, we proposed that mechanisms of information generation are sufficient for consciousness. While it is premature to provide a formal, mathematical definition of information generation, we expect that there be a specific network structure (i.e. a mechanism) that allows an agent to use generative models recursively in an offline manner.


Concluding Remarks

In summary, we proposed that the ability to generate possibly counterfactual information underlies a variety of cognitive functions enabled by consciousness such as intention, imagination, planning, short-term memory, attention, curiosity, and creativity, all of which contribute to non-reflexive, behavioral flexibility. We further hypothesized that information generation corresponds to feedback predictions in the brain using the predictive coding framework as a model of the brain. Further studies are needed to formally define information generation as an intrinsic property of biological and artificial systems.


Editorial: Open science in consciousness research

Anil K Seth, Jakob Hohwy — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019. PMC6910075, CC BY 4.0.

All of us involved in the mind and brain sciences, in whatever capacity, are increasingly aware of the importance of ensuring the credibility of our research. This credibility—which for experimental work turns on its reliability—is particularly salient for consciousness research, given the at-times precarious perception of consciousness science within the wider landscapes of psychology and neuroscience (Michel et al. 2019). We are therefore very pleased to introduce a number of ‘open science’ initiatives that have recently been implemented in Neuroscience of Consciousness.

One key objective of open science is to actively resist the tendency to search for, and to preferentially publish, eye-catching findings that fit with compelling narratives. This means supporting studies that have been designed to report unbiased results that are reproducible and replicable, whether or not they are narratively convenient.

The gold standard approach here is the Registered Report (RR) format. Intuitively, the idea is to allow researchers to retain complete control over their hypotheses, methods and interpretations, but not over the results (Hardwicke and Ioannidis 2018; Chambers 2019). RRs divide the peer review process into two stages. In the first, reviewers evaluate the rationale, hypotheses, methods and proposed analyses for a study. These are described in a ‘stage 1’ manuscript. This stage takes place before any data collection, other than pilot data collected purely to inform study design. Submissions can be rejected, sent for revision, or accepted at this stage. Importantly, stage 1 peer review offers opportunities to enhance study design—including correction of potentially fatal confounds and flaws—while there is still time. This benefits the researchers and is rewarding for the reviewers.

Once a stage 1 submission is accepted, it is preregistered in a time-stamped public repository such as the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/), with or without a temporary embargo. Following this ‘in principle acceptance’, the researchers carry out their planned data collection and perform their preregistered analyses, as well as any additional, clearly demarcated, exploratory analyses. They then submit a stage 2 manuscript incorporating these results and a discussion. The introduction and methods remain unchanged from the stage 1 in-principle-accepted manuscript.

This stage 2 submission is sent back to the original reviewers—who cannot at this point raise post hoc objections to the study rationale or design. Critically, the journal is committed to publish this stage 2 manuscript no matter how the results turn out, so long as the researchers followed the procedures that they described in their stage 1 submission, and have written up their results and discussion sections satisfactorily, as judged by the reviewers. The wow-factor of the results is simply not relevant to the acceptance decision.

In this way, publication of a RR does not depend on the appeal of a post hoc story based on eye-catching findings, but instead on the significance of the research question and the adequacy of the experimental design to address this question. As mentioned, exploratory analyses are not excluded by the RR format. In fact, they are encouraged—so long as they are clearly marked as exploratory and reported separately from the primary preregistered analyses.

Neuroscience of Consciousness has been accepting RR submissions since June 2019, and we are delighted that Prof. Zoltán Dienes (University of Sussex, UK) has joined our editorial team specifically to handle these manuscripts. We strongly encourage consciousness researchers to take advantage of this innovative format. The journal webpages contain further information about the format, including detailed instructions on how to prepare RR submissions (https://academic.oup.com/nc/pages/General_Instructions).

Despite the many benefits offered by RRs, both to individual researchers and to the wider community, we recognize that it is not always possible to follow this process to its fullest extent. This may be the case when data collection cannot be timed to the researcher’s convenience; where the research is purely exploratory, or focuses on methodological innovations, or is otherwise constrained in ways that preclude the RR procedure. Some kinds of research—such as computational modelling—fit uneasily in present RR formats.

Fortunately, RRs are not the only tool by which open science can be facilitated. Experimental designs and proposed analyses can still be—and wherever possible should be—preregistered prior to data collection (Nosek et al., 2018). This means that the critical distinction between (preregistered) confirmatory and (non-preregistered) exploratory analyses can still be maintained. As with RRs, this separation mitigates against the selective reporting or ‘cherry picking’ of results, as well as against p-hacking (conducting repeated analyses until a desired outcome is obtained, without sufficient statistical correction) and HARK-ing (hypothesizing-after-the-results-are-known)—all of which constitute seductive traps for non-preregistered research. Several options for preregistration are available. One flexible format is provided by www.aspredicted.org—with the Open Science Framework again providing a suitable repository.

Other open science initiatives focus on transparency. Experimental data can be shared, along with code implementing the methods and statistical analyses—allowing other researchers to regenerate the results. Again, repositories such as the Open Science Framework are ideal for this purpose. Sometimes, of course, data sharing might not be possible—for example if such sharing might breach patient confidentiality in clinical studies.

To recognize the uptake of these important innovations, Neuroscience of Consciousness now awards Open Science Badges to qualifying papers. These Badges have been developed by the Center for Open Science (https://cos.io), and there is some evidence that they successfully incentivize open science compliance (Kidwell et al. 2016). Each awarded badge features in the published article, enhancing its impact. Three Badges are available for Neuroscience of Consciousness: Open Materials, Open Data and Preregistration. A manuscript can be awarded one, two, or all three, if it qualifies. Authors need only submit a brief Open Science Badge application form along with their manuscript, in order to be considered.

These open science initiatives are not limited to interactions among researchers, reviewers and journals. The ecology of scientific research, as a whole, needs to co-evolve. Further back in the timeline, funding decisions should increasingly be informed by the principles of open science so that grants are awarded on the basis of quality of proposed research rather than on narrative appeal. Academic societies, such as our partner society the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness (ASSC, www.theassc.org), can play an increasingly important role by supporting and giving prominence to open science initiatives. Appointments and promotions up and down academic hierarchies should place more value on robust research, prioritizing quality over quantity and over sometimes diaphanous notions of ‘impact’. Open science is often ‘slow science’—and this slowness and thoroughness should be recognized and valued (Frith 2019). Finally, media coverage must resist the temptation to overplay underpowered research even when—especially when—it tells a nice story.

There is, of course, a place for stories too. In the end, the project of science is to develop a compelling story about how nature works. Open science is not about overturning this ideal. Far from it. Open science is about refining what such stories consist in and how they come to be written. A good scientific story is an empirically robust story.

These are complex and systemic challenges. Their solution will depend on many mechanisms operating at many levels, each serving to better align incentives with desired outcomes. We hope that the open science initiatives now implemented at Neuroscience of Consciousness will contribute to this evolution.


Multisensory modulation of body ownership in mice

Christine L Buckmaster, Julia E Rathmann-Bloch, Luis de Lecea, Alan F Schatzberg, David M Lyons — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC6977007, CC BY 4.0.

Body ownership is a fundamental aspect of self-consciousness that reflects more than the presence of physical body parts. As demonstrated by the rubber hand illusion (RHI), human brains construct body ownership experiences using available multisensory information. Experimental conditions similar to those that induce the RHI in humans have been recently adapted to induce the rubber tail illusion (RTI) in mice. Here, we show that the RTI is enhanced in both sexes of mice by repetitive synchronous stroking comprised of correlated visual and tactile stimulation of real and rubber tails compared to visual-only mimicked stroking conducted without tactile stimulation. The RTI also appears to be enhanced in female but not male mice by slow compared to fast stroking that reflects an interoceptive manipulation associated with affective touch in humans. Sex differences in slow stroking effects are exploratory and require replication in mice. Sex differences have not been reported for the RHI in healthy humans, but women rate slow stroking as more affectively pleasant compared to the ratings of men. Results suggest that the RHI in humans resembles aspects of the RTI in mice. Studies of mice may therefore provide neurobiological insights on evolutionarily conserved mechanisms of bodily self-consciousness in humans.

Keywords: body ownership illusions, multisensory perception, visuotactile integration, affective touch, sex differences, comparative biology


Introduction

Body ownership is a fundamental aspect of self-consciousness that reflects more than simply the presence of physical body parts (Seth and Tsakiris 2018). As demonstrated by the rubber hand illusion (RHI) discovered by Botvinick and Cohen (1998), human brains construct body ownership experiences using available multisensory information. In the past 20 years, RHI has become one of the most extensively studied experimental manipulations of body ownership with more than 375 published reports indexed on PUBMED.

To induce RHI, a person’s own hand is hidden from view while a visible rubber hand is placed in an anatomically plausible position with respect to the body. Hidden real and visible rubber hands are then repetitively stroked synchronously or asynchronously. Compared to repetitive asynchronous stroking, repetitive synchronous stroking results in the illusion that the rubber hand subjectively belongs to the person, and that distances between the visible rubber hand and perceived location of the hidden real hand are smaller than objective measurements demonstrate that they actually are, i.e., proprioceptive drift (Ramakonar et al. 2011). In addition to subjective reports and objective measures of proprioceptive drift, another objective RHI measure is real hand galvanic skin responses when the rubber hand is threatened with harm (Armel and Ramachandran 2003). Subjective and objective responses to various control treatments suggest that RHI reflects perceptual assimilation and not associative conditioning (Armel and Ramachandran 2003). Not all people experience RHI, but 30 s of repetitive synchronous stroking is generally sufficient to induce RHI in 70% of healthy humans (Costantini 2014).

Using RHI-like procedures, Wada et al. (2016) discovered the rubber tail illusion (RTI) in mice. Real and rubber tails are repetitively stroked synchronously or asynchronously, and then head withdrawal movement responses are assessed when the rubber tail is firmly grasped. Defensive head withdrawal responses are monitored because in human and non-human primates motoric defense of the body is an indicator of body ownership (Graziano and Cooke 2006; Ehrsson et al. 2007). Wada et al. (2016) reported that when real and rubber tails are repetitively stroked synchronously, male mice subsequently respond as if their own tail is grasped when the rubber tail is pinched. In contrast, when real and rubber tails are repetitively stroked asynchronously, male mice demonstrate diminished RTI behavioral responses (Wada et al. 2016; Wada et al. 2019). RTI responses in male mice are also diminished after repetitive synchronous stroking of real and rubber tails when the rubber tail is occluded from view by an opaque barrier (Wada et al. 2016). Results suggest that integration of correlated visual and tactile stimulation is important for RTI in mice as has been hypothesized for RHI in humans (Botvinick and Cohen 1998; Armel and Ramachandran 2003; Kilteni et al. 2015; Guterstam et al. 2019).

Here, we further investigate RTI as evidence of body ownership in mice. First, we test the hypothesis that repetitive synchronous stroking comprised of correlated visual and tactile stimulation of real and rubber tails enhances RTI behavioral responses compared to visual-only mimicked stroking conducted without tactile stimulation in both sexes of mice. Evidence suggests that visual-only stimulation may or may not be sufficient for induction of RHI in humans (Durgin et al. 2007; Rohde et al. 2011; Ferri et al. 2013; Guterstam et al. 2019), and we investigate this issue for RTI in mice. Then, we test the hypothesis that RTI behavioral responses in mice are enhanced by slow compared to fast stroking treatments that represent an interoceptive manipulation associated with affective touch in humans (Crucianelli et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013; van Stralen et al. 2014; Crucianelli et al. 2018).

Affective touch is thought to be mediated by C-tactile afferents that project from hairy but not glabrous skin (Crucianelli et al. 2018). Mouse tails are comprised of hairy skin (Duverger and Morasso 2009), and the mouse equivalent of C-tactile afferents are called C-low threshold mechanoreceptors (C-LTMRs), which reside in mouse hairy skin (Liu et al. 2007; Li et al. 2011). Like C-tactile afferents in humans, C-LTMRs in mice selectively respond to slow stroking (Vrontou et al. 2013). Experimental evidence further suggests that C-LTMRs causally mediate positively reinforcing behavioral effects of slow stroking in mice (Vrontou et al. 2013). Therefore, we test for RTI modulation by slow compared to fast stroking treatments in both sexes of mice.


Materials and Methods

Subjects included eight male and eight female C57BL/6J mice purchased as adults from Charles River (Gilroy, CA). Mice were housed in groups of four same-sex individuals in climate-controlled rooms with an ambient temperature of 26°C. Food and water were provided ad libitum. Treatment and test procedures were conducted during the light phase of the circadian cycle with lights on from 07:00 to 19:00 h. All procedures were conducted in accordance with state and federal laws, standards of the US Department of Health and Human Services, and the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Stanford University.

Each mouse was individually acclimated to standing stationary while loosely restrained in a clear plastic 50 ml BD Falcon tube tapered to a cone at one end. The other end of the tube was partially enclosed to accommodate the tail through a hole in the screw-on cap. Head and body movements forward and backward were possible, but mice could not turn around in the tube. Acclimation was accomplished when each mouse stood stationary in the tube for ≥45 of 60 s (75%) on each of three consecutive daily assessments.

The tube was fixed onto a 15 cm × 15 cm plastic platform raised 10 cm above bench top with the rubber tail attached to the platform on the right side of the tube. Because mice can bend their tails forward, the rubber tail was located in a plausible anatomical position. Human RHI research indicates that improbable positioning causes a breakdown of the illusion (Lloyd 2007; Brozzoli et al. 2012). To prepare the rubber tail, a matte colored photograph of a real tail was adhered to heavy paper 9.5 cm in length and graduated from 5 mm at the base to 2 mm at the tip of the tail. In various stroking treatments described below, real and rubber tails were manually stroked repetitively for 1-min using separate Filbert flat art brushes with synthetic soft bristles (10 mm width by 20 mm length). The real tail was always hidden from view while the rubber tail was visible to the mouse.

First, we used a within-subjects counterbalanced cross-over design to compare synchronous and visual-only mimicked stroking treatment conditions in both sexes of mice. Each condition was applied for a 1-min trial per day for 5 days per condition. In the synchronous condition, real and rubber tails were repetitively stroked synchronously for 1-min with correlated visual and tactile stimulation. In the visual-only mimicked condition, repetitive synchronous stroking was mimicked for 1-min with sweeping motions conducted 1 cm above the real and rubber tails without ever touching either tail. The latter condition is similar to treatments used by Guterstam et al. (2019) in RHI studies of humans and represents an alternative to the asynchronous control for RTI used by Wada et al. (2016) in male mice.

Repetitive rates of stroking applied by Wada et al. (2016) to male mice ranged from 0.5 to 2 Hz. In Experiment 1 described above, we examined the low end of this range in both sexes of mice and applied irregular stroking repetition rates of 0.5–0.9 Hz at a constant velocity of 3 cm/s along a 3 cm length of tail. Velocities have been systematically compared in RHI studies of humans, but repetition rates were either varied irregularly, concurrently with velocities, or were not specified (Crucianelli et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013; van Stralen et al. 2014; Crucianelli et al. 2018). Varied repetition rates have been examined in RTI studies of mice (Wada et al. 2016; Wada et al. 2019), but varied velocities have not been considered.

In two RTI experiments, we systematically varied repetition rates while holding velocity constant, or we concurrently varied repetition rates and velocities. Specifically, Experiment 2 compared a slow repetition rate of 0.1 Hz and a faster repetition rate of 0.3 Hz with both rates applied at a constant velocity of 3 cm/s along a 3 cm length of tail. Experiment 3 compared a slow velocity of 1 cm/s applied at a rate of 0.3 Hz and a faster velocity of 6 cm/s applied at a rate of 2.0 Hz along a 3 cm length of tail. Each speed-of-stroking treatment condition was applied for a 1-min trial per day for 2 days per condition using within-subjects counterbalanced cross-over designs.

Experiments were conducted sequentially using all mice with 2–3 week intervals between each of three experiments. Following Wada et al. (2019), a digital stopwatch was used to control delivery of the stroking treatments. All stroking treatments were practiced before each experiment on the rubber tail in the absence of a mouse by a trained investigator (C.L.B.).

Immediately after each stroking treatment condition, three rubber tail pinch tests were conducted sequentially at 3- to 5-s intervals to robustly sample head movement responses induced by the experimenter strongly grasping the rubber tail with a strength similar to that used when lifting a mouse. Because mice were loosely restrained in the RTI apparatus without holding their head fixed facing towards the rubber tail, three sequential pinch tests were conducted to robustly sample RTI pinch test behavior described below. Human RHI research indicates that illusions induced by repetitive synchronous stroking last for ∼90 s (Lane et al. 2017).

Digital video recordings of all pinch tests were coded for identification and scored offline as described by Wada et al. (2016). Briefly, if the head turned toward or away from the rubber tail, or the head or body moved forward or retracted backward into the tube, this was considered a full response and was scored as 1. If the response was partial or incomplete, this was scored as 0.5. Postural adjustment or no head movement was scored as 0.

Pinch test video recordings were independently scored by two trained raters. Video recorder failure resulted in missing data from one female mouse. One rater (J.E.R.-B.) had no knowledge of stroking treatments used in the studies, and the other rater (C.L.B.) had limited knowledge from administering all stroking treatments 3- to 14-days before scoring video recordings. From the three sequential pinch tests per mouse that followed each stroking treatment, we separately computed mean RTI pinch test response scores for each rater.

After all pinch tests were scored and inconsistencies identified for rater retraining, both raters independently rescored 90 randomly selected sets of three sequential pinch tests. From rescored data, we computed mean RTI pinch test response scores separately for each rater to evaluate inter- and intra-rater reliabilities expressed as intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) (Koo and Li 2016). Inter-rater ICC derived from a two-way random-effects single measure model was 0.90, and intra-rater ICC derived from a two-way mixed-effects single measure model was 0.92. Because of similar inter- and intra-rater reliabilities, initially collected mean RTI pinch test response scores from each rater were averaged to serve as our unit of analysis. This approach follows Wada et al. (2016).

Response score distributions were assessed for normality with Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests and evaluated by analysis of variance (ANOVA). For the first experiment, stroking treatments (synchronous versus mimicked) and test days (1–5) were considered within-subjects factors, and sex was considered a between-subjects factor. The two speed-of-stroking experiments were analyzed with separate ANOVAs with stroking speed (slow versus fast) and test days (1–2) considered within-subjects factors, and sex was considered a between-subjects factor. Sex differences were also assessed using the χ2 test. Test statistics were evaluated at P < 0.05 (two-tailed), effect size estimates were determined using partial eta squared η2 (Fritz et al. 2012), and descriptive statistics were presented as mean ± SEM. Data are provided in.


Results

Acclimation to standing stationary in the RTI apparatus was accomplished in 4 weeks by all mice. RTI pinch test response score distributions did not differ significantly from normal in the synchronous (P = 0.66), mimicked (P = 0.98), or speed-of-stroking (P = 0.65) treatment conditions. Therefore, we used fully factorial ANOVAs to assess stroking treatments, test days, and sex effects.

RTI pinch test responses were enhanced after synchronous compared to mimicked stroking treatments as discerned by a treatment main effect [F(1, 13) = 23.2, P < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.64]. Treatment effect sizes for males (partial η2 = 0.73) and females (partial η2 = 0.59) were similar, and statistically significant sex differences were not discerned. The test day main effect was not significant, but a significant test day-by-sex interaction [F(4, 52) = 2.8, P = 0.035] was found. In both synchronous and mimicked stroking treatments, pinch test responses declined after the 4th test day in females [F(4, 24) = 4.3, P = 0.009], but not in males (P = 0.742). Pinch test responses averaged across all 5 test days for each individual mouse revealed consistent mean differences in favor of synchronous compared to visual-only mimicked stroking for 14 of 15 mice.

Next, we systematically manipulated stroking speeds. The only significant finding was a speed-of-stroking-by-sex interaction [F(1, 13) = 6.0, P = 0.029, partial η2 = 0.32] evident only when stroking velocities and repetition rates were varied concurrently. For the speed-of-stroking-by-sex interaction depicted in, subsequent exploratory analysis revealed that RTI pinch test responses were enhanced by slow compared to fast stroking in females [F(1, 6) = 5.6, P = 0.05, partial η2 = 0.49] but not in males [F(1, 7) = 1.2, P = 0.316, partial η2 = 0.15]. When stroking repetition rates were varied alone while holding velocity constant, none of the main or interaction effects was statistically significant.

Sex differences in speed-of-stroking effects were further assessed by analysis of individual mice when both stroking repetition rates and velocities were varied concurrently. Mean differences in RTI pinch test responses after slow compared to fast stroking were greater in 5 of 7 females (71%) and 1 of 8 males (12%). This sex difference is statistically significant (χ2 = 5.4, P = 0.02).


Discussion

RTI pinch test responses are enhanced by repetitive synchronous stroking comprised of correlated visual and tactile stimulation of real and rubber tails compared to visual-only mimicked stroking conducted without tactile stimulation. Similar results in both sexes extend findings by Wada et al. (2016) in male mice. RTI responses also appear to be enhanced in female but not in male mice by slow compared to fast stroking treatments that represent an interoceptive manipulation associated with affective touch in humans (Crucianelli et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013; van Stralen et al. 2014; Crucianelli et al. 2018). Sex differences in slow stroking effects are exploratory and require replication in mice. Sex differences have not been reported for RHI in healthy humans (Guterstam et al. 2019), but women rate slow stroking as more affectively pleasant compared to the ratings of men (Croy et al. 2014; Jonsson et al. 2017). Results suggest that RHI in humans resembles aspects of RTI in mice. Studies of mice may therefore provide neurobiological insights on evolutionarily conserved mechanisms of bodily self-consciousness in humans.

Multisensory contributions to body ownership are difficult to determine because separate senses are tightly bound together and not normally accessible to independent experimental manipulation. Illusions induced by manipulated stimulation provide powerful tools to investigate how brains construct body ownership using available multisensory information (Costantini 2014; Kilteni et al. 2015). Integration of correlated visual and tactile stimulation is important for RHI in humans (Botvinick and Cohen 1998; Armel and Ramachandran 2003; Kilteni et al. 2015; Guterstam et al. 2019), and likewise contributes significantly to RTI in mice.

Wada et al. (2016) first reported that repetitive synchronous stroking of real and rubber tails enhances RTI behavioral responses in male mice compared to identical stroking treatments applied when the rubber tail is occluded from view. Here, we find in both sexes of mice that repetitive synchronous stroking comprised of correlated visual and tactile stimulation of real and rubber tails enhances RTI responses compared to visual-only mimicked stroking conducted without tactile stimulation. Although visual-only treatments may or may not be sufficient for induction of RHI in humans (Durgin et al. 2007; Rohde et al. 2011; Ferri et al. 2013; Guterstam et al. 2019), visual-only mimicked stroking appears to be insufficient for induction of RTI in both sexes of mice. The possibility that this finding reflects species differences in visually induced tactile expectations remains to be explored.

Repetitive rates of stroking applied by Wada et al. (2016) to male mice ranged from 0.5 to 2 Hz. The low end of this range was examined in Experiment 1 with irregular stroking repetition rates of 0.5–0.9 Hz applied at a constant velocity of 3 cm/s along a 3 cm length of tail in both sexes of mice. In follow-up experiments, we either systematically varied repetition rates while holding velocity constant, or we concurrently varied repetition rates and velocities. Varied velocities significantly modulate RHI in humans (Crucianelli et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013; van Stralen et al. 2014; Crucianelli et al. 2018). RTI likewise appears to be modulated in female but not in male mice when velocities and repetition rates are varied concurrently, but statistically significant modulation is not evident in mice of either sex when repetition rates are varied alone.

Until recently, neurobiological and biomedical studies of mice have focused primarily on males (Beery and Zucker 2011), and RTI sex differences are largely unexplored. Although sex differences have not been reported in RHI studies of healthy humans (Guterstam et al. 2019), women subjectively rate slow stroking as more affectively pleasant compared to the subjective ratings of men (Croy et al. 2014; Jonsson et al. 2017). Possible neural mechanistic explanations include sex differences in brain circuits that process speed-of-stroking stimulation, or sex steroid hormone modulation of C-tactile afferent functions. Manipulations required to experimentally investigate causal neural mechanisms are often more readily accomplished in mice than in humans, and this advantage supports development of RTI as a model of body ownership in mice.

Our results should be interpreted in the context of potential limitations. Subjective experiences cannot be assessed directly in mice, but nearly identical stroking treatments can be applied to humans and mice. After various stroking treatments, we scored RTI pinch test responses with an ordinal Likert scale and converted ordinal measures into interval data by taking the mean of three sequential pinch tests per mouse after each stroking treatment. This approach follows standard recommendations (Carifio and Perla 2007), and generates data distributions that do not differ significantly from normal. Consequently, our data are suitable for parametric statistical tests (Sullivan and Artino 2013). Effect sizes are greater in mice for modulation of RTI by exteroceptive stimulation compared to interoceptive speed-of-stroking stimulation, but further studies need to vary velocities while holding repetition rate constant. Velocities have been systematically compared in RHI studies of humans (Crucianelli et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013; van Stralen et al. 2014; Crucianelli et al. 2018), but repetition rates either vary irregularly, concurrently with velocities, or are not specified.


Conclusions

RTI pinch test behavioral responses in both sexes of mice are enhanced by repetitive synchronous stroking comprised of correlated visual and tactile stimulation of real and rubber tails compared to visual-only mimicked stroking conducted without tactile stimulation. RTI responses also appear to be enhanced in female but not in male mice by slow compared to fast stroking treatments that represent an interoceptive manipulation associated with affective touch in humans. Sex differences in slow stroking effects are exploratory and require replication in mice. Sex differences have not been reported for RHI in healthy humans, but women rate slow stroking as more affectively pleasant compared to the ratings of men. Results suggest that RHI in humans resembles aspects of RTI in mice. Studies of mice may therefore provide neurobiological insights on evolutionarily conserved mechanisms of bodily self-consciousness in humans.


Ethics

All procedures were conducted in accordance with state and federal laws, standards of the US Department of Health and Human Services, and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Stanford University.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data are publically available in and.


Awareness as inference in a higher-order state space

Stephen M Fleming — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7065713, CC BY 4.0.

Humans have the ability to report the contents of their subjective experience—we can say to each other, ‘I am aware of X’. The decision processes that support these reports about mental contents remain poorly understood. In this article, I propose a computational framework that characterizes awareness reports as metacognitive decisions (inference) about a generative model of perceptual content. This account is motivated from the perspective of how flexible hierarchical state spaces are built during learning and decision-making. Internal states supporting awareness reports, unlike those covarying with perceptual contents, are simple and abstract, varying along a 1D continuum from absent to present. A critical feature of this architecture is that it is both higher-order and asymmetric: a vast number of perceptual states is nested under ‘present’, but a much smaller number of possible states nested under ‘absent’. Via simulations, I show that this asymmetry provides a natural account of observations of ‘global ignition’ in brain imaging studies of awareness reports.

Keywords: theories and models, computational modeling, consciousness, metacognition


Introduction

Humans have the ability to report the contents of their subjective experience—we can say to each other, ‘I am aware of X’. Such reports, unlike many other aspects of behaviour, are intended to convey information about experience (Frith et al. 1999). This property of awareness reports makes them central to a science of consciousness, which has focused on measuring and quantifying differences in awareness while holding other aspects of stimuli and behavioural performance constant (Bernard 1993; Dehaene and Changeux 2011). In this article, I propose a computational framework that characterizes awareness reports as metacognitive decisions (inference) about a generative model of perceptual content. This higher-order state space (HOSS) framework builds on Bayesian approaches to perception that invoke hierarchical probabilistic inference as a route towards efficiently modelling the external world (von Helmholtz 1860; Kersten et al. 2004; Friston 2005; Hohwy 2013).

The outline of the article is as follows. I start by describing the psychological processes hypothesized to support awareness reports with reference to experimental paradigms commonly used to study conscious awareness. Second, I outline the central hypothesis, that awareness is a higher-order state in a generative model of perceptual contents. Third, I model a simple perceptual decision to explicate aspects of the framework, and distinguish it from other, related approaches such as signal detection theory (SDT; Green and Swets 1966; King and Dehaene 2014). Finally, I highlight empirical predictions that flow from the model, and how it relates to existing theories of consciousness such as global workspace and higher-order theories.


Psychological Basis of Awareness Reports

Several authors have proposed that the psychological basis of a (visual) awareness report is an internal decision about the visibility of perceptual contents (Ramsøy and Overgaard 2004; Sergent and Dehaene 2004; King and Dehaene 2014). (The same computational considerations likely hold for awareness of other sensory modalities—a focus on visibility here reflects a historical bias towards vision in studies of conscious awareness.) This implies that internal states supporting awareness reports, unlike those covarying with perceptual contents themselves, are both simple and abstract—simple because they vary along a 1D continuum from unaware to aware, and abstract because they do not encode the perceptual state itself, only its presence or absence. Note that a better terminology for ‘unaware’ is really ‘absent’, ‘unseen’ or ‘noise’, as participants remain aware of seeing nothing on trials on which they report ‘unaware’. Awareness reports also refer to different subsets of perceptual content: for instance, subjects may be asked ‘did you see the word?’, ‘did you see the number?’ or ‘did you see anything at all?’. These two features imply that awareness reports are metacognitive decisions about a rich perceptual generative model. I will make this hypothesis more concrete in the next section.

A range of experimental paradigms have been developed to introduce variability in awareness reports while keeping other aspects of stimuli and behaviour fixed (see Kim and Blake 2005 for a review). For example, using backward masking, Dehaene et al. (2001) found that they could make words invisible while showing (via priming effects and brain imaging) that they were processed up to a semantic level. When subjects reported consciously seeing the words, whole-brain fMRI showed elevated activations in the parietal and prefrontal cortex, which have become known as ‘global ignition’ responses due to their non-linear response profile in relation to stimulation strength (Del Cul et al. 2007; Dehaene and Changeux 2011). Since these classic studies, alternative explanations of frontoparietal ignition have been put forward, including that it is involved in the act of reporting, but not conscious awareness, or that it reflects greater performance capacity on conscious trials (Lau and Passingham 2006; Aru et al. 2012). These debates are ongoing (see Tsuchiya et al. 2015; Michel and Morales 2019, for recent arguments from both sides).


Hypothesis

In common with other predictive processing approaches, we assume that the brain is engaged in building a hierarchical, probabilistic generative model of the world, one in which inference and learning proceed using (approximations of) Bayes’ rule. One algorithmic implementation of Bayesian generative models is predictive coding, whereby perceptual causes encoded at higher levels of the system generate predictions about incoming sensory data (Friston 2005; Hohwy 2013). presents an outline of this scheme, in which two perceptual causes (apple or orange) generate predictions that ‘compete’ to explain the incoming sensory data, while lower layers in turn signal the error in the current prediction. Via a prediction error minimization scheme, over time the best explanation of the sensory data is ‘selected’ at higher levels of the system.

The novel aspect of the current framework is its focus on incorporating awareness into the perceptual generative model—explaining how decisions to respond ‘I am aware of X’ or ‘I am unaware of X’ get made. (Note that here I am focusing on reportable states of awareness, and leaving aside the issue of whether non-reportable contents may be conscious (Block 1995). By adopting this stance, we can frame a clear question that is answerable by cognitive science: what are the computational processes involved in producing awareness reports? (Dennett 1993; Graziano 2013).)

The central hypothesis is:

Awareness is a higher-order state in a generative model of perceptual contents.

Awareness reports are governed by a second-order (metacognitive) inference about the state of a first-order (perceptual) generative model (Fleming and Daw 2017). One way of implementing this second-order inference is by adding an additional hierarchical state above the perceptual generative model, which I refer to as an ‘awareness state’. Paralleling the psychological simplicity of awareness reports, the awareness state is also simple, and signals a probability of whether there is perceptual content in the lower layers (corresponding to reports of ‘present’ or ‘absent’). It is also part of the generative model, such that if the model is run forward, states of presence (vs. absence) lead to the top-down generation of perceptual states in lower layers.

As we reviewed above, a central property of awareness states is that they are abstract—we can flexibly interrogate awareness of not only apples or oranges, but also many other aspects of perceptual experience. In the language of probabilistic generative models, this implies awareness states are factorized with respect to lower-order perceptual causes. This notion of factorization is depicted in for the case of awareness of different shapes (a circle or square). Rather than maintaining separate states for aware-of-circle, aware-of-square, unaware-of-circle and unaware-of-square, this space can be factorized into two states, one for circle/square, and another for aware/unaware. However, this factorization is asymmetric. In the absence of awareness, there is (by definition) an absence of perceptual content, such that being unaware of a circle is similar to being unaware of a square. In contrast, a large number of potential perceptual states is nested under the awareness state of ‘presence’. This imposes an asymmetry in the model architecture which we will leverage in the next section when seeking to account for global ignition responses.


Model

The model can be described formally in terms of a probabilistic graphical model (Pearl, 1988), where nodes correspond to unknown variables and the graph structure is used to indicate dependencies between variables. These graphs provide a concise description of how sensory data are generated.

W is a vector that encodes the relative probabilities of each of N discrete perceptual states. A is a scalar awareness state encoding the probability of a perceptual state W being ‘present’ or ‘absent’ (w0). Each ‘perceptual’ state W here is discrete, but in practice this state space is likely to be multidimensional and also hierarchically organized. By expanding the graphical model to enumerate each discrete state, it is straightforward to see how this architecture imposes an asymmetry on the perceptual state space: awareness (a1) entails the possibility of perceptual content, whereas unawareness leads to the absence of content (w0). To simulate multivariate sensory data (X), W in turn determines the value of μ, which is a M × N matrix defining the location (mean) of a multivariate Gaussian in a feature space of dimensionality M. Σ is a M × M covariance matrix which in the current simulations is fixed and independent of A and W.

When answering the query, ‘Present or absent?’, we compute the posterior, marginalizing over perceptual states W:

where the likelihood of X given W is:

As in standard models of perceptual decision-making such as SDT, inference on contents W is also straightforward:


Simulations

To simulate the model, I build on previous work using a 2D feature space to capture important features of multidimensional perceptual categorization (King and Dehaene 2014). Each axis represents the strength of activation of one of two possible stimulus features, such as leftward or rightward tilted grating orientations. The origin represents low activation on both features, consistent with no stimulus (or noise) being presented. As in the more general case described in the previous section, each stimulus category generates samples from a multivariate Gaussian whose mean is dominated by one or other feature. Thus, if I receive a sample of, I can be confident that I was shown a left-tilted stimulus; if I receive a sample, I can be confident in seeing a right-tilted stimulus.

King and Dehaene (2014) showed that by placing different types of decision criteria onto this space, multiple empirical relationships between discrimination performance, confidence and visibility could be simulated. In their model, visibility was modelled as the distance from the origin, and stimulus awareness reflected a first-order perceptual categorization in which ‘absent’ was one of several potential stimulus classes. Our model builds closely on theirs and inherits the benefits of being able to accommodate dissociations between forced-choice responding and awareness reports. However, it differs in proposing that awareness is not inherent to perceptual categorization; instead, perceptual categorization is nested under a generative model of awareness. In other words, unlike in SDT, deciding that a stimulus is ‘absent’ in the HOSS model is governed by a more abstract state than deciding a stimulus is tilted to the left or right. We will see that this seemingly minor change in architecture leads to important consequences for the relationship between awareness and global ignition.

To explore the properties of the model, I simulate inference at different levels of the hierarchy for the two-class stimulus discrimination problem described in. I first simulate, for a variety of 2D inputs (X’s), the probability of saying ‘aware’ or ‘seen’. shows that this probability rises in a graded manner from the lower left corner of the graph (low activation of any feature) to the upper right (high activation of both features). In contrast, confidence in making a discrimination response (e.g. rightward vs. leftward) increases away from the major diagonal, as the model becomes sure that the sample was generated by either a leftward or rightward tilted stimulus. As in King and Dehaene (2014), these changes in discrimination confidence also occur in the absence of reporting ‘seen’.

I next simulate a proxy for prediction error at each layer in the model—in other words, how much belief change was induced by the sensory sample. I use the Kullback–Leibler (K-L) divergence as a compact summary of how far the posterior probability distribution at each level in the network differs from the prior. Flat priors were used for both the A and W levels. The K-L divergence is a measure of Bayesian surprise, which under predictive coding accounts is linked to neural activation at each level in a hierarchical network (Friston 2005; Summerfield and de Lange 2014). For instance, if the model starts out with a strong prior that it will see gratings of either orientation, but a grating is omitted, this constitutes a large prediction error (an unexpected absence). Thus, computing K-L divergence provides a rough proxy for the amount of ‘activation’ we would expect as a function of different types of decision.

At the level of perceptual states W, there is substantial asymmetry in the K-L divergence expected when the model says ‘seen’ vs. ‘unseen’. This is due to the large belief updates invoked in the perceptual layer W by samples that deviate from the origin. In contrast, when we compute K-L divergence for the awareness state, the level of prediction error is symmetric across seen and unseen decisions. This is because at this level inference on presence and absence is symmetric. When simulating these belief updates over a range of precisions to mimic increasing stimulus-onset asynchrony in a typical backward-masking experiment, we see that the asymmetry in K-L divergence of the W states increases with stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA), producing an ignition-like pattern when the stimulus is ‘seen’.


Empirical Predictions

The model is currently situated at a computational level and remains agnostic about temporal dynamics and neural implementation. (For recent work translating probabilistic graphical models into models of neuronal message passing see George et al. (2017) and Friston et al. (2017).). Here, I instead focus on coarser-scale predictions about the neural correlates of awareness reports in typical consciousness experiments.

First, as hinted above, an asymmetric state space for presence and absence suggests there will be greater summed prediction error in the entire network on presence decisions (as summarized by K-L divergence at each node of W). This may be a computational correlate of the global ignition responses often found to track awareness reports (Del Cul et al. 2007; Dehaene and Changeux 2011).

Second, the model predicts that awareness reports (but not discrimination performance, which relies on lower-order inference on W) will depend on higher-order states. These may be instantiated in neural populations in prefrontal and parietal cortex (Lau and Rosenthal 2011). Thus, it may be possible to silence or otherwise inactivate the neural substrates of an awareness state without affecting performance—a type of blindsight (Weiskrantz 1999; Del Cul et al. 2009). However, to the extent that this network is flexible in its functional contribution to higher cognition, showing both ‘multiple demand’ characteristics (Duncan 2010) and mixed selectivity (Mante et al. 2013), we should also not be surprised by null results, given that single lesions may belie redundancy in its contribution to awareness (Michel and Morales 2019).

Third, for the uppermost awareness state, we expect symmetry—decisions in favour of both presence and absence will lead to belief updates of similar magnitude. There has been limited focus on examining decisions about stimulus absence (as these decisions are often used as a baseline or control condition in studies of perceptual awareness). However, existing data are compatible with symmetric encoding of presence and absence at the upper level of the visual hierarchy, in primate lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC; Panagiotaropoulos et al. 2012). Merten and Nieder (2012) trained monkeys to report the presence or absence of a variety of low-contrast shapes presented near to visual threshold. Neural activity tracking the decision (present or absent) was decorrelated from that involved in planning a motor response by use of a post-stimulus cue that varied from trial to trial. Distinct neural populations tracked the decision to report ‘seen’ vs. ‘unseen’. Importantly the magnitude of activation of these populations was similar in timing and strength, suggesting a symmetric encoding of awareness in LPFC. Using fMRI, Christensen et al. (2006) also observed symmetric activation for judgments of presence and absence (compared to an intermediate visibility rating) in anterior prefrontal cortex, whereas a global ignition response was seen for presence (compared to absence) in a widespread frontoparietal/striatal network.

More broadly, the current framework suggests that focusing on inference about absence will be particularly fruitful for understanding the neural and computational basis of conscious awareness (Merten and Nieder 2012; Farennikova 2013; Merten and Nieder 2013).


Role of Precision Estimation in Resolving Awareness States

The current simulations assume that the noise of sensory input is fixed, but in reality this parameter would also need to be estimated. A range of disambiguating cues are likely to prove important in such an estimation scheme and thereby affect an inference on awareness. For instance, beliefs about the state of attention or other properties of the sensory system provide global, low-dimensional cues as to the state of awareness (Lau 2008; Graziano 2013). Computationally these cues may be implemented as beliefs about precision (priors on Σ in the model in), where precision refers to the inverse of the noise (variability) we expect from a particular sensory channel.

Another source of information about sensory precision is proprioceptive and interoceptive input about bodily states. Consider the following thought experiment in which we set up two conditions in a dark room, one in which the subject has their eyes open and one in which they have their eyes closed. Now imagine that we have arranged for neural activity in early visual areas to be identical in the two cases (the X’s are the same), and that in both cases the subject is told (for instance via an auditory cue) that there might have been a faint flash of light. Despite the visual activity being identical, the subject can be sure that they didn’t see anything when their eyes were closed compared to when they were open. In other words, proprioception provides disambiguating information as to the current state of awareness—when the eyes are open we expect to have higher precision input than when the eyes are closed.

One straightforward way of introducing this relationship is to allow precision itself to depend on awareness (a connection between A and Σ in). Such a modification implies that an awareness state may be 2D, encoding the distinction between whether something has the potential to be seen (high vs. low expected precision or eyes open vs. eyes closed) as well as whether something is seen (present vs. absent; Metzinger 2014; Limanowski and Friston 2018). This aspect of the HOSS model is also in keeping with Graziano’s attention schema model of consciousness, in which awareness is equated to a model of attention (Graziano, 2013). However, in contrast to the attention schema approach, in HOSS a model of attention provides a critical input into resolving ambiguity about whether we are aware or not (by affecting beliefs about precision), rather than determining awareness itself.


Relationship to Other Theories of Consciousness

The goal of the higher-order state-space (HOSS) approach outlined here is modest—to delineate computations supporting metacognitive reports about awareness. This is a useful place to start given that report (or the potential for report) is the jumping-off point for a scientific study of consciousness.

A stronger reading of the model is that conscious awareness and metacognitive reports depend on shared mechanisms in the human brain (Shaver et al. 2008; Brown et al. 2019). This stronger version shares similarities with higher-order theories of consciousness, particularly Lau’s proposal that consciousness involves ‘signal detection on the mind’ (Lau 2008; Hohwy 2015). Notably, a process of hierarchical inference may take place via passive message-passing without any strategic, cognitive access to this information e.g. in working memory (Carruthers 2017), making it compatible with higher-order representational accounts of phenomenal consciousness (Brown 2015).

However, while inference on higher-order states is, on this view, necessary for awareness, it may not be sufficient. In HOSS, the higher-order awareness state is simple and low-dimensional. Lower-order states clearly make a contribution to perceptual experience under this arrangement—a variant of the ‘joint determination’ view advocated by Lau and Brown (2019). However, it seems an empirical question as to the relative granularity of higher-order and first-order representations, and a range of intermediate views are plausible. The more important point is that the state space is factorized to allow two separate causes of the sensory data—what it is, and whether I have seen it. In other words, becoming aware of a red, tilted object may depend on learning an abstract, factorized state of presence/absence that is not bound up with the states of being red or tilted. This is likely to be computationally demanding in a rich, multidimensional state space (as it requires marginalizing over W) and may be rare in most cognitive systems.

HOSS also provides a new perspective on global workspace (GWS) architectures. GWS proposes that consciousness occurs when information is ‘globally broadcast’ throughout the brain. As a result of global broadcast, cognitive and linguistic machinery have access to information about a particular stimulus or subpersonal mental state (Dehaene et al. 1998). HOSS retains the ‘global’ aspect of GWS, in that an awareness state is hierarchically higher with respect to the range of possible perceptual states, and therefore has a wide conceptual purview. However, HOSS recasts ignition-like activations as asymmetric inference about stimulus presence rather than a consequence of stimulus content being ‘broadcast’. Such a move potentially resolves the conundrum of how global broadcast directly accounts for systems claiming to be conscious of a stimulus without positing additional machinery. Global access to the workspace allows the system to say ‘there is an X’, but not endow it with the capacity to report awareness of X. This point is made concisely by Graziano (Graziano 2016):

Consider asking ‘Are you aware of the apple?’ The search engine searches the internal model and finds no answer. It finds information about an apple, but no information about what ‘awareness’ is, or whether it has any of it… It cannot answer the question. It does not compute in this domain.

In other words, it is difficult to see how such a system can be actively aware of the absence of stimulation when global broadcast is constitutive of awareness. The state space approach outlined here is designed explicitly to compute in this domain, and therefore does not suffer from the same problem. Another critical difference between GWS and HOSS is that HOSS predicts prefrontal involvement for active decisions about stimulus absence, whereas GWS predicts that PFC remains quiescent on such trials due to a failure of the stimulus to gain access to the workspace.

Finally, to the extent that abstract awareness states need to be learnt or constructed, creating this level may require a protracted period of development. Such development would begin with creating a perceptual generative model (W) before a more general property (awareness) could be abstracted from these perceptual states. This is consistent with Cleeremans’ ‘radical plasticity thesis’ in which consciousness is underpinned by learning abstract representations of both ourselves and the world (Cleeremans 2011).


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Model and simulation code can be accessed at https://github.com/smfleming/HOSS.


A multiple-response frequency-tagging paradigm measures graded changes in consciousness during perceptual filling-in

Matthew J Davidson, Irene L Graafsma, Naotsugu Tsuchiya, Jeroen van Boxtel — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7151726, CC BY 4.0.

Perceptual filling-in (PFI) occurs when a physically present visual target disappears from conscious perception, with its location filled-in by the surrounding visual background. These perceptual changes are complete, near instantaneous, and can occur for multiple separate locations simultaneously. Here, we show that contrasting neural activity during the presence or absence of multi-target PFI can complement other findings from multistable phenomena to reveal the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC). We presented four peripheral targets over a background dynamically updating at 20 Hz. While participants reported on target disappearances/reappearances via button press/release, we tracked neural activity entrained by the background during PFI using steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) recorded in the electroencephalogram. We found background SSVEPs closely correlated with subjective report, and increased with an increasing amount of PFI. Unexpectedly, we found that as the number of filled-in targets increased, the duration of target disappearances also increased, suggesting that facilitatory interactions exist between targets in separate visual quadrants. We also found distinct spatiotemporal correlates for the background SSVEP harmonics. Prior to genuine PFI, the response at the second harmonic (40 Hz) increased before the first (20 Hz), which we tentatively link to an attentional effect, while no such difference between harmonics was observed for physically removed stimuli. These results demonstrate that PFI can be used to study multi-object perceptual suppression when frequency-tagging the background of a visual display, and because there are distinct neural correlates for endogenously and exogenously induced changes in consciousness, that it is ideally suited to study the NCC.

Keywords: contents of consciousness, methodology, perception, psychophysics


Introduction

In perceptual filling-in (PFI) phenomena, areas of the visual environment that are physically distinct become interpolated by the visual features of the surrounding texture or background (Ramachandran and Gregory 1991; Pessoa et al. 1998; Meng et al. 2005; Komatsu 2006; Weil and Rees 2011). Although PFI neatly displays how our awareness of a visual scene is shaped by (unconscious) inferential processes (Komatsu 2006), it has traditionally been investigated to understand how our visual system compensates for retinal-blind spots (Ramachandran and Gregory 1991; Durgin et al. 1995; Komatsu et al. 2000; Spillmann et al. 2006) and visual field defects (Gassel and Williams 1963; Gerrits and Timmerman 1969; Safran and Landis 1996). Accordingly, a range of low-level visual attributes such as target contrast (Stürzel and Spillmann 2001), target eccentricity (De Weerd et al. 1998), and microsaccades (Martinez-Conde et al. 2006) have been investigated as potential causes that affect the phenomenal properties and dynamics of PFI. In this context, the neural interpolation of information in lower visual areas has been implicated as one active mechanism behind PFI (De Weerd et al. 1995; Pessoa et al. 1998; Meng et al. 2005; Komatsu 2006). Here, we were motivated to explore the usefulness of PFI as a method to capture changes in conscious awareness in a graded manner, and its potential to contribute to ongoing investigations of the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC).

We believe PFI can contribute to NCC research for two main reasons. Firstly, PFI spontaneously occurs with prolonged fixation, similar to other multistable phenomena, and can occur over multiple regions embedded in the same visual background (Lou 1999; De Weerd 2006; De Weerd et al. 2006). It may therefore be possible for neural measures to capture graded changes in awareness when more than one stimulus simultaneously disappears. This feature may enable future studies to test theoretical accounts of whether neural measures of perception correlate with a gradual or all-or-none phenomenon (Sergent and Dehaene 2004; Tagliabue et al. 2016; Haque et al. 2019), and to reduce the requirements for tracking changes in awareness via motor-report (Tsuchiya et al. 2015). Secondly, although not tested in the present manuscript, selectively attending to the location of a target or the shared features among peripheral targets (Lou 1999; De Weerd 2006; De Weerd et al. 2006) also increases the likelihood of PFI. Thus, PFI could provide us a rare opportunity, where top-down attention and conscious perception appear to result in opposing effects, and therefore provide key answers to one hotly debated issue in consciousness research: the nature of the relationship between attention and consciousness (Iwasaki 1993; Posner 1994; Velmans 1996; Hardcastle 1997; Lamme 2003; Dehaene et al. 2006; Koch and Tsuchiya 2007; van Boxtel et al. 2010); and for recent reviews see Special Issues in Frontiers in Psychology—(Tsuchiya and Van Boxtel 2013) and in Philosophical Transactions—(Fazekas and Overgaard 2018).

To demonstrate the potential of PFI in this line of research, we first sought to capture neural markers of changes in awareness with a multi-target and multi-response paradigm. To capture the neural correlates of these changes, we combined multi-target PFI with frequency-tagging in the electroencephalogram (EEG) (Vialatte et al. 2010; Norcia et al. 2015). Only one previous study has investigated PFI using frequency-tagged responses, and flickered only a single target in their display (Weil et al. 2007). Here we frequency-tagged the background of our visual display, and analysed response-locked changes to background activity. We hypothesized that as the phenomenological interpolation of target regions increased, an increased neural response to the surrounding visual background would be recorded. To foreshadow our results, frequency-tagging the background showed graded responses to the amount of change in conscious perception. With this paradigm, we were also able to distinguish the neural correlates of PFI from phenomenally matched disappearances (PMD), and reveal novel spatiotemporal profiles of frequency-tagged responses which prompt further research using our novel paradigm. Therefore, we suggest that the combination of PFI and frequency-tagging can be a valuable addition in search of the NCCs.


Materials and Methods


Participants

Twenty-nine healthy volunteers were recruited for this experiment. As the effect size of frequency-tagging the background stimuli is unknown, we chose to test 50% more participants than previous studies that used frequency-tagging to study target responses during PFI (Weil et al. 2007), or the neural correlates of perception during binocular rivalry (e.g. Lawwill and Biersdorf 1968; Brown and Norcia 1997; Tononi et al. 1998; Srinivasan et al. 1999; Cosmelli et al. 2004; Srinivasan 2004; Srinivasan and Petrovic 2006; Kamphuisen et al. 2008; Sutoyo and Srinivasan 2009; Zhang et al. 2011; Katyal et al. 2016). Participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. All participants were recruited via convenience sampling, provided written informed consent prior to participation and received a monetary compensation (30 Australian Dollars) for their time. The study was approved by the Monash University Human Research and Ethics Committee (MUHREC #CLF016). We excluded seven participants due to low quality behavioural data, or due to not reporting any PFI during testing, bringing our final sample to N = 22 (13 female, 18–39 years of age, M = 24.6, SD =5.4 years).


Apparatus and stimuli

Participants were seated in a dark room approximately 50 cm distance from a computer screen (size 29 × 51 cm, resolution 1080 × 1920 pixels, subtending 32 × 54° visual angle, refresh rate 60 Hz). We did not stabilize head position via chin-rest, and so minor movements and adjustments to visual angle may have occurred. To frequency-tag the background image, we prepared 100 random patterns prior to the start of each experiment by first downsampling the screen to 540 × 960 pixels. We then assigned a random luminance value (drawn from a uniform distribution from black to white) to each down-sampled pixel. These background images were refreshed at a rate of 20 Hz by randomly selecting from the set of 100 prepared patterns.

On top of this background image, the display was composed of a central fixation cross (1.03° visual angle in height and width), surrounded by four counter-phase flickering 2 × 2 checkerboard targets (4.56° visual angle in diameter). The checkerboard elements of these targets reversed polarity every half-cycle of an approximately sinusoidal envelope, approximating one of four unique frequencies (8, 13, 15 and 18 Hz). Most of these sinusoidal envelopes were not an exact divisor of our monitor’s refresh rate, but still have the most power at the chosen frequencies. We chose these frequencies, because small, peripherally located targets are more likely to disappear when flickering above 7 Hz (Schieting and Spillmann, 1987; Anstis, 1996). A target was located in each quadrant, centred at 23.3° eccentricity from the centre of the screen. The targets were located closer to the horizontal than vertical: horizontal distance from centre 20.2°, vertical distance from centre 11.5°. Targets were smoothly alpha-blended into the background texture following a 2D Gaussian profile (SD = 1.06° visual angle in diameter). We chose to use small, peripherally located flickering targets to optimally induce PFI, yet these same parameters are sub-optimal for frequency-tagging stimuli. As a result, our simultaneous background flicker, which is the novel element of our experiment, remains as a relatively pure EEG measure for tracking the disappearance of multiple PFI targets.


Task procedure

Each experimental session was composed of 25 trials, 60 seconds per trial. Between the trials, participants were able to take short self-timed breaks, resulting in a total time-on-task of approximately 30 minutes. Participants were instructed to fixate on the central cross, and informed they may sometimes experience a visual illusion where any number of peripheral targets disappear from their field of vision. We did not monitor eye position. Participants then completed one practice trial to familiarize themselves with the four button presses required for targets in each visual quadrant. Specifically, they were instructed to press keys ‘A’, ‘Z’, ‘K’ and ‘M’ on a traditional QWERTY keyboard, assigning them to the upper left, bottom left, upper right and bottom right targets, respectively. Participants were instructed to hold each button for the duration of disappearance, and to release it immediately upon the corresponding reappearance of the target. presents the basic configuration of the experimental display used.


Phenomenally matched disappearances

We introduced phenomenally matched disappearances (PMD) without informing participants, to check if participants were correctly reporting on perceptual disappearances and maintaining attention on task. These physical PMD also served as a control condition for comparison with the neural signals evoked by PFI.

During a PMD, one to four targets were physically removed from the display and replaced with the background by linearly ramping the alpha blending value of the target from 1 to 0 (or vice versa) over 1.5 seconds. Each PMD (without ramps) was 3.5–5 seconds in duration (drawn from a uniform distribution). When two or more targets were removed, their disappearance was synchronous. The location of the removed targets in the case of one, two and three targets were randomized (each occurring on six trials per participant). The order of these PMD events were also randomized for each participant. To mimic the overall dynamics of PFI (Schieting and Spillmann, 1987), we did not include PMD within the first 10 seconds of each trial. We also did not include PMD within the last 10 seconds. Four-target PMD occurred only for 7 of our final 22 participants due to a coding error, resulting in PMD being presented on 83% of trials overall.


Participant and trial exclusion based on PMD

Initial screening analyses sought to confirm whether participants were able to simultaneously monitor the visibility of multiple peripheral targets using four unique buttons and perform this task accurately in compliance with instructions. Due to a keyboard malfunction, button-press responses to three and four disappearing targets became indistinguishable in our post hoc analysis. Thus, we analysed the state of three button press as ‘3 and 4 buttons pressed’. We analysed the likelihood of button-press responses during PMD to estimate participant’s attention on task. As PMD were embedded within a trial, some PMD occurred when participants had already pressed buttons. Such events are more frequent for those who report more frequent PFI, and accounting for this baseline likelihood of button-press is necessary to accurately estimate PMD responses. To estimate this baseline button-press rate per individual participant, we performed a bootstrapping analysis with replacement. For a given PMD onset in trial T at time S (seconds), we randomly selected a trial T′ (T = T′ was allowed) and epoched the button-press time course over the period of [S − 2, S + 4] at corresponding PMD target locations in trial T′. We repeated this for all trials (T = 1…24, except for the 4-PMD error mentioned above) to obtain a single bootstrapped set of trials per participant. We then obtained the mean button-press time course across button-locations from this bootstrapped set, and repeated the procedure 200 times to obtain a null distribution, representing the likelihood of baseline button-press around PMD onset per participant (grey lines and shading). We also obtained the mean button-press time course for observed data across button-locations.

As the distribution at each time point for both observed and baseline data was not normally distributed, we first converted the data into z-scores using the logit transformation before calculating the confidence intervals (CI). Then, we used mean z-scores (±1.96 SD of z-scores) as the CI for the null distribution of baseline data within each participant, and observed data across participants.

We excluded three participants whose mean button-press time course around the actual PMD onset failed to exceed the CI of the baseline button-press likelihood within the first 2 seconds (i.e. [0, S + 2]). We defined the PMD-onset reaction time as the first time point after which the mean buttonpress data exceeded the top CI, indicating successful button presses for PMD targets. shows the PMD response for an example participant retained for analysis. Four further participants were removed from subsequent analyses for failing to experience PFI during most of the experimental session (i.e. only brief events on one or two trials). For the remaining participants, the mean reaction time to respond to PMD onsets, and thus the disappearance of a peripheral target was 0.92 seconds (SD = 0.046). shows the proportion of button-press responses for all PMD events across participants retained for analysis (N = 22). For the corresponding analysis for reappearances, see.

Having identified which participants could successfully indicate target disappearance based on their button-press data, we continued to identify and remove any trials from the subsequent analysis in which a PMD was not correctly detected. We undertook this procedure to assure that in all retained trials participants paid proper attention on task and accurately reported on PFI. We regarded a PMD as being successfully identified if participants pressed the corresponding button for at least 50% of the allowed response time window. For multi-target PMD, we applied the same criteria for each button separately. If any button was not pressed at least 50% of the time, the PMD was considered undetected. For four-target PMD, we analysed it as if it was a three-target PMD. This window was from the onset of the PMD plus 1 second (in consideration of the reaction time delay) to the end of PMD. For example, if the PMD under consideration was 3.5 s in duration, we defined the allowed time window to be [1, 3.5] seconds from the PMD onset. shows a participant-level histogram for the proportion of rejected trials (M ± SD: 1.75 ± 1.48 trials or 8.96 ± 7.89% of all trials).


Quantifying PFI and PFI location-shuffling analysis

We analysed the number of PFI events, average duration of PFI events and total duration of PFI per 60 second trial. Although these variables may be correlated, they have also been shown to reveal complementary data features in similar multi-target designs (Bonneh et al. 2001; Thomas et al. 2017; McEwen et al. 2020). We note that button-press responses to three and four disappearing targets became indistinguishable in our post hoc analysis, due to a keyboard malfunction, and have been grouped in our analysis as ‘3 and 4 buttons pressed’. Thus, each of these PFI measures were compared based on the number of PFI (nPFI; 1, 2, 3 and 4), quantified by the number of simultaneous button-press responses at each time point. Because transient button-press periods (< 200 ms) could reflect genuine transient percepts, we opted not to exclude these responses from our reported analyses. Having said that, excluding them did not significantly alter the data.

To investigate whether the simultaneous multi-target PFI observed in participant data exceeded that expected by chance, we performed a shuffling analysis. We created 1000 shuffled trials for each participant, by randomly selecting the button-press time course for each of the four target locations, independently, from any of the trials throughout their experimental session (this could include multiple locations within the same trial). As the location of each button press in shuffled data could come from any independent trial (e.g. top left = trial 1, top right = trial 23, bottom left = trial 18, bottom right = trial 18), this shuffling procedure conserved the mean number of PFI events overall, while estimating the level of simultaneous invisibility between multiple PFI targets that occurs by chance, when locations are independent. As such these newly created trials provided a null distribution to compare to the observed data, as the presence of a temporal correlation between target locations was removed in shuffled data. The comparison between the observed and the shuffled data is displayed in.


EEG acquisition and preprocessing

EEG acquisition and preprocessing were performed according to standard procedures. After examining the topography of log(SNR) responses (see below), we applied rhythmic entrainment source separation (RESS) to optimally extract the time-course of frequency-tagged components of steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) without relying upon electrode channel selection (Cohen and Gulbinaite 2016). As RESS produces a single component time-series which is the weighted response from across all channels, we did not use RESS-filtered data for the spatial correlation analysis described below. A more detailed explanation of RESS, and our application, is contained in the.


SSVEP signal-to-noise ratio calculation

To estimate the strength of SSVEPs, we first calculated the natural log of the power spectrum via the fast Fourier transform. In the SSVEP paradigm, we operationally regard power at the tagged frequency as signal and power at non-tagged neighbouring frequencies as noise (Norcia et al. 2015) and compute the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at each frequency. In logarithmic scale, this corresponds to log of the power at each frequency subtracted by the mean log power across the neighbourhood frequencies. In this article, all SNR results are based on this log-transformed SNR metric because without log-transform, SNR is highly skewed and not appropriate for various statistical tests.

We quantified the topography of SSVEP responses, over the period −3000 to −100 ms before, and 100–3000 ms after button press. We excluded the 200 ms around button-press responses to avoid motor-related activity. Over the 2.9 second time window (half-bandwidth = 0.35 Hz), we computed the SNR at frequency f (Hz) as the mean log power over the neighbourhood frequencies defined as [f − 1.22, f − 0.44] Hz and [f + 0.44, f + 1.22] Hz. In addition, we also computed the time-course of the SNR over a 1 second window (half-bandwidth = 1 Hz) with a step-size of 150 ms, to enable the comparison of fluctuations in SNR over time. For this shorter time window, we used the neighbourhood as [f − 3.92, f − 1.95] Hz and [f + 1.95, f + 3.92] Hz to compute the log(SNR) time course. Our main analyses focus on the time-course of log(SNR) activity during changes in perception. For whole-trial SSVEP power, log(SNR) spectra, and SNR time-course data cleaning see.


Quantifying changes in SSVEP-SNR during changes in the amount of PFI

We investigated whether the amount of PFI reported would reflect changes in RESS log(SNR) across participants. For PFI disappearances and reappearances, we averaged this over [0, +3] seconds and [−3, 0] seconds with respect to the button press or release, respectively. We call this sum of the number of buttons pressed over these time periods ‘the amount of PFI’. As the frequency of PFI events varied greatly between participants, we performed an event-by-event analysis (Fujiwara et al., 2017) before across-participant averaging. For this analysis, all PFI events were epoched around button press/release, and sorted in descending order based on the amount of PFI. We then resampled each participants PFI events along the trial-dimension to 100 trials, in order to normalize the event count per participant. On this normalized event count, we then grouped all events when the amount of PFI was between 0 and 1, 1 and 2, or greater than 2 (predetermined by button-press). The average RESS log(SNR) during these periods, categorized by the amount of PFI reported, is shown in. Additional methods and a schematic pipeline for this entire procedure are displayed in and.


Reconstruction analysis to compare the impact of multiple target disappearances and reappearances on SNR, during PFI and PMD

We included PMD to compare with PFI, yet the temporal profile of these phenomena differs markedly. This is because PFI can accumulate at multiple targets within close temporal proximity, yet PMD were programmed to always occur simultaneously. To quantify the similarity between PFI and PMD while accounting for these differences in temporal structure, we performed a reconstruction analysis. Specifically, we estimated whether changes to log(SNR) during PMD could be accurately modelled using the recorded changes in log(SNR) from PFI periods. For this analysis, we averaged the response to PFI using 75% of trials per participant (excluding PMD), and retained this temporal change in log(SNR) as a reconstruction kernel. Using this kernel, we then reconstructed the expected temporal profile of log(SNR) for the remaining 25% of trials, based on the timing of button-press responses per participant. The comparison between the reconstructed (expected) changes based on kernels, and actual log(SNR) during PFI and PMD in this remaining 25% of trials are displayed in. A more detailed description and schematic of this procedure are contained in the and.


Analysis of SNR timing differences

Past research on binocular rivalry has indicated that perceptual alternations between frequency-tagged stimuli are captured in the time course of SSVEP-SNR (e.g. Brown and Norcia 1997; Tononi et al., 1998; Cosmelli et al. 2004; Zhang et al., 2011; Katyal et al., 2016). We were interested to see whether changes in SNR could also predict button presses/releases in our multi-target PFI paradigm, and compared the onset at which 1f and 2f responses indicated a change in perception. For background related SNR, this requires overlaying the same SSVEP response (e.g. 20 Hz) during both disappearance and reappearance, as opposed to comparing two unique simultaneous SSVEPs as is usually done in binocular rivalry research (e.g. Zhang et al. 2011; Katyal et al. 2016).

We compared the disappearance and reappearance time courses using running paired samples t-tests (two-tailed) at each time point. Clusters of significant time points were identified which satisfied P < 0.05 (uncorrected) over a minimum of two time points (or 300 ms) in our moving-window SNR. Per participant, the first time point in these clusters was taken as when the SNR differentiates between target disappearance and reappearance in our analysis. We then compared the earliest time-points detected by this procedure for 1f and 2f, using a two-tailed paired-samples t-test. We also performed the same analysis to compare the time course of SNR during PMD. Note that this cluster-procedure is distinct from the procedure described below, which retains the largest cluster for non-parametric tests.


Spatial correlation analysis

To perform the spatial correlation analysis, we calculated the time-course of a 64 channel correlation between 1f and 2f log(SNR). Due to differences in the number of PFI and PMD, we downsampled (with replacement) the number of PFI events to 24, which was the maximum number of PMD available. We then calculated the correlation between 1f and 2f, separately within PFI and PMD for this subset of trials, and repeated this analysis 100 times to obtain a distribution of downsampled correlation values. The mean correlation value from this downsampled distribution was then used to compare the spatial correlation of PFI and PMD at each time point around button press and release. The results of this analysis are displayed in.


Statistical analysis—EEG

All statistical analyses were performed using Matlab (ver: R2016b) and jamovi (ver 0.9; The jamovi project, 2018). To assess the significance of SSVEP peaks in the EEG spectra, we corrected for multiple comparisons with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 (Benjamini and Yekutieli 2001; Benjamini et al. 2006). For corrections of multiple comparisons on the time courses, we used temporal cluster-based corrections (Maris and Oostenveld 2007). For this analysis, the sum of observed test-statistics (e.g. t scores) in a temporally contiguous cluster were retained for comparison with a permutation-based null distribution. Specifically, first, we detected any temporally contiguous cluster by defining a significant time point as P < 0.05 uncorrected (Maris and Oostenveld 2007). Then, we concatenated the contiguous temporal time points with P < 0.05 and obtained a summed cluster-level test statistic for the cluster. Second, we repeated this procedure after shuffling the subject specific averages within each participant 2000 times. From each of the 2000 shuffled data, we obtained the summed cluster-level test statistics at contiguous temporal time points with P < 0.05 uncorrected, which served as a null distribution. We regarded the original observed effect to be significant if the original summed cluster-level statistics exceeded the top 97.5% of the null distribution of the summed statistics (as pcluster < 0.025).


Results


Behavioural analysis: a synergistic effect of multi-target PFI

First, we examined behavioural data to investigate whether our unique multi-target design had captured an interaction between the four simultaneously presented peripheral targets. Previous research has suggested that neighbouring targets within a single visual quadrant may disappear together (De Weerd et al. 1998). Our design allowed us to examine whether much more widely distributed peripheral targets also interact. Such an interaction would be non-trivial if occurring across the disparate retinotopic locations of all four quadrants of the visual periphery, and would imply the involvement of potentially high-level neural mechanisms that have access to these long-range relations (Wagemans et al. 2012).

While simultaneous disappearances of 3 and 4 targets were rare (only 2.9 events per trial; blue bars), when they happened, the event tended to be sustained for a long duration (2.2 seconds). As a result, the total duration of 3 and 4 target invisibility (7.6 seconds per trial) is comparable to that of 2 target invisibility and longer than that of 1 target invisibility, which happened at the highest rate (8.8 events per trial, 5.8 seconds in total per trial). We formally tested this linear trend by linear mixed effects analysis and likelihood ratio tests (with random intercepts for each subject). We performed likelihood ratio tests between the full model and a restricted model which excluded the factor of interest (Glover and Dixon 2004; Winter 2013). The number of invisible targets (nPFI) significantly affected (i) the number of PFI events per trial (χ2(2) = 47.83, P = 4.1 × 10−11), (ii) the average duration of PFI per event (χ2(2) = 23.59, P = 7.53 × 10−6) and (iii) total PFI duration per trial (χ2(2) = 7.27, P = 0.026).

These significant trends imply that interactions among distant targets occur in a synergistic way, and that when one target is invisible it is often accompanied by other invisible targets. To directly test if this is the case, or if these trends occur by chance, we employed a shuffling analysis (see Materials and methods). In the shuffled data, the number of PFI events per trial decreased as the number of invisible targets (nPFI) increased, which is similar to what we observed in the empirical data (10.8, 7.1 and 2.7 events per trial for 1, 2 and 3, and 4 target invisibility; grey bars). However, the trend for shuffled data was quite different for the average durations per PFI event, which were roughly equal across nPFI in shuffled data (2, 1.6 and 1.3 seconds, respectively), and the total duration of PFI per trial, which decreased as a function of the number of invisible targets (16.6, 9.7 and 3.8 seconds, respectively).

To statistically evaluate these trends between the observed and the shuffled data, we compared the slopes of the linear fit for each of the three PFI variables as a function of the number of invisible targets (nPFI; 1, 2, 3 and 4). For this analysis, we fit a linear model (first-order polynomial) to the observed data across participants, and retained the slope (β) as our observed test statistic. We also fit the same linear model to each of n = 1000 sets of shuffled data, computed from the shuffled trials across participants. For all variables, the observed slope was outside the top 97.5% of the slopes in the shuffled data (corresponding to two-tailed P < 0.05). Notably, the observed positive slope for PFI duration and total duration in and c is contrary to the expected negative slope produced by our shuffled data. This negative slope in shuffled data implies that if there are no spatial interactions between distant targets, we should expect the simultaneous invisibility of 3 and 4 targets to be unlikely, and sustained for a shorter duration. By contrast, as more targets are involved in PFI, the longer the disappearances are sustained, strongly suggesting a facilitative interaction between invisible peripheral targets. We return to this synergistic effect of multi-target PFI in our Discussion.


SSVEP time course reveals graded changes in conscious perception

Next, we turned to our EEG analysis of SSVEPs. Both 1f (20 Hz) and 2f (40 Hz) frequency-tagged responses to our background display were strongest at POz (on average, across participants). However, the spatial topography differed between 1f and 2f. The 1f response was localized to midline occipital electrodes, while the 2f response extended beyond these regions to include lateral parieto-occipital and parietal electrodes. Due to the variance across participants in the spatial distribution of these responses, we employed RESS (Cohen and Gulbinaite 2016), to optimally extract the SNR per participant, and to avoid multiple comparisons across electrodes (see Materials and methods). Using RESS, we analysed the time-course of log(SNR) for background-related 1f and 2f responses. All log(SNR) values we present are the RESS log(SNR), except for the spatial correlations presented in.

A second qualitative insight concerned the time-course of log(SNR) activity: 1f and 2f increase just before button press when targets disappear (at time = 0), and increase with the amount of PFI (d, g, h). Similarly, log(SNR) for 1f and 2f decrease just before button release at target reappearance, but there is no dependence on the amount of PFI (f, i, j). To quantitatively compare these differences, we split SNR time courses based on the amount of PFI. f show the mean log(SNR) over each 6 second epoch, separately averaged for events with the amount of PFI between 0 and 1, 1 and 2 or greater than 2. Around the target disappearance events, we found a significant linear effect for the amount of PFI on the SNR for both 1f (χ2(1) = 8.75, P = 0.003) and 2f (χ2(1) = 8.21, P = 0.004) responses to background flicker. Around target reappearance events, by contrast, the amount of PFI did not significantly affect the SNR (and f, 1f; P = 0.76; 2f; P = 0.83). j displays the time course of the SNR separately for each level of the amount of PFI.


Reconstruction analysis: SNR time courses during PFI are distinct from those during PMD

The previous analysis has shown that changes to the log(SNR) of background flicker were related to the amount of PFI, we next considered whether these changes could be distinguished from the changes evoked by PMD. Contrasting PFI and PMD could isolate the neural substrates which are unique to an endogenous change in perception (as in PFI), as opposed to a physically induced change (as in PMD). To account for whether the changes in log(SNR) during PFI are distinct from those during PMD, we performed an SNR-reconstruction analysis. In brief, we used 75% of trials to estimate reconstruction kernels, which were the changes to log(SNR) during PFI in this ‘training’ data. We then applied these kernels to the remaining 25% of ‘test’ trials, aligning each kernel to the recorded button press time-points (see Materials and methods and). We then compared the predicted time course of log(SNR) based on the reconstruction kernels, with the actual time course in the test trials during genuine PFI and PMD. visualizes the high quality of prediction for the genuine PFI and the poor predictive quality for PMD. These differences in predictive accuracy of our SNR reconstruction analysis implicate distinct neural substrates for PMD and PFI.

We quantified reconstruction prediction accuracy as the degree of correlation between the predicted and the observed time course. Specifically, we calculated R2 between the respective epoched log(SNR) around button press/release events during genuine PFI and PMD. For both 1f and 2f, the predicted SNR was correlated more strongly with genuine PFI than the PMD, for both disappearances and reappearances. Using three-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), we confirmed that the prediction accuracy is significantly better for the genuine PFI than PMD (main effect: F(1, 21) = 151.01, P = 4.7 × 10−12). We found no or weak main effects and interactions due to other factors (i.e. 1f vs. 2f, disappearances vs. reappearances).


Timing differences: 1f and 2f background-related responses are temporally distinct during PFI

Even though our reconstruction analysis predicted both the 1f and 2f components of background-related SNR during PFI events, these harmonic responses were topographically distinct. As there is a nascent literature suggesting that SSVEP harmonics may correspond to separate cortical loci (e.g. Pastor et al. 2007), and cognitive processes (Kim et al. 2011), we next investigated these spatiotemporal differences in more detail.

First, we superimposed the time courses for disappearances/reappearances in the same plot, and calculated the periods at which the log(SNR) significantly differed between them. For 1f (and b, blue), the log(SNR) during disappearances (solid lines) became larger than that during reappearances (dotted lines), consistent with an increase in background-SNR during the phenomenal experience of targets becoming filled-in by the background. This effect occurred from 0.67 seconds prior to subjective report (paired t-tests, pcluster < 0.001). Notably, these effects occurred 1.06 seconds later for PMD (from 0.39 seconds after the subjective report, pcluster < 0.001). For 2f (and b, magenta), the log(SNR) also became larger during disappearances than reappearances from 0.97 seconds prior to report (pcluster < 0.001), and again, were shifted roughly 1.36 seconds compared to the PMD-related time course (from 0.39 seconds after the subjective report; pcluster < 0.001).

The observed divergence in the time for significant changes to 1f and 2f SNR seemed quite large (0.3 seconds) given that both 1f and 2f were evoked from the same stimulus, using identical participants and events. As such we performed an exploratory analysis, and further investigated if this effect could be observed at the participant level. For this analysis, we calculated for each participant the first time point at which the strength of background log(SNR) during disappearance was significantly greater than during reappearance, using running paired t-tests. The first time-point in a temporally contiguous cluster was retained per participant for both 1f and 2f log(SNR), and then compared at the group level. Using this criterion, we found that during PFI, 2f responses significantly differed at −1.02 seconds (SD = 0.41), 170 ms earlier than 1f responses, at −0.85 seconds (SD = 0.37, Wilcoxon signed rank test, z = 2.13, P = 0.012). No difference was observed in the timing for the PMD-related 1f and 2f time courses (P = 0.14). These findings were confirmed using a jack-knife procedure. The distribution of participant-level first significant time-points are displayed in and d.


Spatial correlation: 1f and 2f background responses are spatially distinct during PFI

demonstrated that the temporal dynamics of 1f and 2f differed around PFI. These SNR time-series, however, are dependent on the fit of RESS spatial filters, and the spatial distribution of frequency-tagged responses is also known to vary with changes in perception (Tononi et al. 1998; Srinivasan 2004; Srinivasan et al. 2006). To test this possibility, we continued our exploratory analysis and performed a spatial correlation analysis, to examine the topographic distribution of 1f and 2f responses during PFI in 64-channel log(SNR) data (see Materials and methods).

When targets disappeared during PFI, the 64-channel spatial correlation between 1f and 2f transiently increased. The difference between the time courses was significant for the time-window −0.67 to 0.25 seconds around subjective report (paired t-tests at each time point, pcluster < 0.001). In contrast, when targets were removed during PMD, the spatial correlation between harmonics remained constant. The same pattern of results was maintained when using a parietal or occipital sub-region of electrodes (but no change in correlation was seen for frontal or temporal electrodes), indicating that synchronous changes in predominantly parieto-occipital SNR were responsible for changes to the whole-head correlation over time (shown in). The same pattern was also observed when subtracting the mean log(SNR) per channel prior to calculating this spatial correlation over time, confirming this change in correlation was driven by a change in the spatial extent of SNR, rather than transient increase in SNR. These results support a distinction between 1f and 2f responses that is unique to PFI and suggest that the timing differences observed may be partially driven by changes to the spatial distributions of 1f and 2f responses.


Discussion

We combined a multi-target PFI paradigm with frequency-tagged EEG. This combination has revealed that changes to the contents of perception can be tracked behaviourally across multiple simultaneous locations, and that gradual changes to neural markers accompany these reports in the frequency-tagged EEG. We also found an unexpected asymmetry for graded disappearances and reappearances, and spatiotemporal distinctions between steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) harmonics (1f and 2f background responses). Here, we discuss these findings focusing on several advantages of our experimental paradigm for future NCC research.


Multi-target PFI to track changes in conscious perception

Frequency-tagging has been used to study the NCC, mainly in combination with binocular rivalry (Brown and Norcia 1997; Tononi et al. 1998; Sutoyo and Srinivasan 2009; Zhang et al. 2011; Jamison et al. 2015; Katyal et al. 2016). Unlike stimuli normally used in binocular rivalry, where changes in perception are often patchwork or complex (Wilson et al. 2001; Knapen et al. 2011); but also see (Blake et al. 1992; O’Shea et al. 1997), perceptual changes during PFI are complete and near instantaneous, suggesting PFI can prove to be a useful psychophysical tool to study the NCC. In our multi-target and multi-response task, participants report on graded perceptual changes with each button, which also indicate where in space these changes occur. Our simultaneous EEG enabled the amount of change in the contents of consciousness to be recorded (i.e. the amount of PFI), and in principle, which targets disappear can also be addressed in future research.

This approach revealed an asymmetry between the neural correlates of disappearances and reappearances: background SNR increased with the amount of PFI at disappearance, but not reappearance. One possible explanation is a difference in the spatial and temporal predictability of these events. Increased spatial predictability follows from the fact that reappearances can only occur at locations where a target has already disappeared moments earlier. Increased temporal predictability follows from the fact that the duration of PFI are relatively short compared to periods of visibility. In support of this difference during PFI periods, differences in predictability have also been measured via greater phasic pupil responses to target disappearances than reappearances during motion-induced blindness (Kloosterman et al. 2015; Thomas et al. 2017), a paradigm that may be closely related to PFI (Hsu et al. 2004, New and Scholl 2008; Devyatko et al. 2017). Another possibility is that during PFI, microsaccades may have shifted the position of targets on the retinae, which is known to counteract filling-in (Martinez-Conde et al. 2006). While we did not control for microsaccades in our design, a reappearance driven by eye-movements would also be consistent with the asymmetry we have observed, and can be tested in future experiments with eye-tracking hardware.


A synergistic effect demonstrates the spatial-range of PFI mechanisms

Our results are relevant to two popular models of PFI. The first model proposes the primary substrate of PFI are neurons in early retinotopic areas corresponding to target regions, which are activated via neurons corresponding to their surrounds through lateral connections (De Weerd et al. 1995; Pessoa et al. 1998). The low-level model specifically proposes that the mechanisms of PFI are confined to retinotopic cortex, with disappearance happening via a two-stage process. A first stage of seconds-long target-boundary adaptation is followed by a second stage of near instantaneous interpolation of the target location by surrounding visual features (Spillmann and De Weerd 2003). The second is a high-level symbolic model, whereby filling-in occurs when the visual system ignores an absence of information (Kingdom and Moulden 1988; Dennett 1991; O’regan 1992). In this model, the phenomenon of filling-in is realized at a higher representational level, and not as the result of any point-to-point representation in early visual cortex. Instead, a region devoid of information is symbolically labelled as ‘more of the same’ background, and thus is rendered invisible.

In favour of the low-level model, previous electrophysiological data have shown increased spike rates in regions responding to a filled-in pattern in monkeys (De Weerd et al. 1995). Importantly, De Weerd et al.’s (1995) single-unit study did not obtain subjective reports from their non-human primates. With human participants, Weil et al. (2007) recorded decreases in average SSVEP power for targets during PFI periods, yet did not provide the time-course of response-locked frequency-tagged activity. A critical aspect of our novel approach, missing from these earlier studies, is our response-locked analysis which allowed us to examine if the exact timing of increases in neural activity precedes or follows the onset of a perceptual disappearance. By recording simultaneous subjective reports, we conclude that an increase in background SNR precedes PFI events. This slow, seconds-long increase in background-related SNR prior to PFI events supports an active mechanism as a catalyst for PFI, which is central to the low-level model (but also consistent with some high-level explanations). Our SNR reconstruction analysis also showed significant differences between PFI and PMD, suggesting that the presence of competitive mechanisms supporting perceptual disappearances in PFI are an important contribution to these background-related SNR differences. The potential involvement of neural responses from a visual background region onto surrounded visual space is also supported by a recent finding in individuals with Charles-Bonnet Syndrome (CBS), who perceive visual hallucinations in response to vision loss within visually deafferented space. It was shown that the visual periphery that surrounds these visually deafferented regions shows enhanced activation in individuals with CBS, compared to controls (Painter et al. 2018).

On the other hand, the low-level model is difficult to reconcile with our behavioural findings, which more readily support that filling-in happens in higher-level visual areas, in accordance with symbolic models. Specifically, we observed a synergistic effect among spatially distant targets, wherein targets from separate retinotopic locations interacted to remain invisible for longer during PFI. This interaction implies the involvement of neurons that have larger receptive fields, typically found only in higher-level visual areas (Yoshor et al. 2007; Dumoulin and Wandell 2008). This across-quadrant facilitatory interaction contrasts with the results of de Weerd et al. (1998) which were in support of the low-level model. There, de Weerd et al. (1998) argued that differences in PFI onset times for separate locations indicated that PFI mechanisms operate with a limited spatial range. Instead, the synergistic effects we have observed may point to a mechanism that facilitates perceptual grouping (Wagemans et al. 2012). This strongly argues against the limited spatial range of PFI mechanisms, implying the involvement of higher-cortical regions that can influence neural activity across visual hemifields.

Grouping may also interact with attentional mechanisms. Indeed, attending to shared features, such as temporal modulation, has been shown to enhance the binding of distributed visual regions into a perceptual group (Alais et al. 1998). As attending to shared features such as colour (Lou 1999) or shape (De Weerd et al. 2006) also increases the disappearance of peripherally presented targets, fluctuations in attention to the targets as a group may also have impacted on multiple-locations synergistically. Alternatively, the simultaneous disappearance of multiple targets could be due to random fluctuations of the brain’s response to the background (potentially also modulated by attention). Since the background surrounds all targets, a temporary increase in response could affect the visibility of all targets simultaneously.

Overall, our results show that PFI does not result purely due to local adaptation processes in retinotopic cortex, and extends our understanding of the spatial range of PFI mechanisms. Cortical regions with larger receptive fields may account for this synergistic effect of enhanced PFI, a hypothesis that may be tested in future research with source localization techniques.


Spatiotemporal profiles of 1f and 2f background SSVEP are distinct

Another insight that arose from our application of SSVEP to study PFI regards the difference in spatiotemporal profiles of 1f and 2f responses. As we used a single-taper method, with a fixed time-window and step-size, this latency difference cannot be due to differences in temporal smoothing between harmonics (for the theory and simulation of these smoothing effects in time and frequency domains, see of Takaura et al., 2016). This difference was specifically modulated around the time of PFI. In the literature, 1f and 2f are traditionally considered to be similar, as they are dictated by the same stimulus input (Norcia et al. 2015). Recently, this assumption has been challenged by finding that 2f responses are more sensitive to attentional modulation under some conditions, such as when symmetrically oscillating light-dark flicker (Pei et al. 2002; Kim et al. 2007; Kim and Verghese 2012), and differ in their topography, with an increased lateralization of 2f responses (Appelbaum et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2011), involving parieto-occipital cortex (Pastor et al. 2007). While we also observe an increased spatial distribution of 2f—as 1f was strongest over mid-occipital sites and 2f extended laterally—the flicker stimuli used in our experiments differ from those studies that optimized differentiating 1f from 2f (e.g. Kim et al. 2011). As such, extending this interpretation to our findings should be done with caution, but the temporal advantage of 2f compared to 1f prior to PFI would be consistent with a covert attentional modulation of 2f that instigates a perceptual change. Future studies with an explicit attentional manipulation will be needed to confirm whether the harmonic differences we have reported are due to the allocation of attention.


Conclusions

Here we have extended efforts to refine NCC paradigms, by combining PFI with frequency-tagging. With our novel flickering background display, we successfully induced the PFI of multiple targets, which participants were able to accurately report on without much training. We were able to mimic the phenomenological dynamics of PFI with our physical PMD. Although we did not formally test the discriminability of PMD compared to PFI, no participants spontaneously reported their awareness of PMD. Despite the similarity between PFI and PMD, we revealed significant differences in their respective neural substrates through our SNR reconstruction analysis, which suggest that these differences are due to the presence of competitive mechanisms supporting perceptual—but not physical disappearances. While the current study focused on tagging the background, future studies may also reveal the exact nature of such competitive mechanisms by simultaneously tagging both the targets and background during PFI. Unexpectedly, we found significant differences in the effect that the amount of PFI had on SNR during disappearances and reappearances. While we suggest that the difference could be due to differences in the level of predictability, to address this question more thoroughly, future studies could manipulate the disappearance frequency of targets by manipulating their stimulus properties (e.g. contrast or eccentricity or by changing the number of targets to be reported. We hope that our approach of combining the under-utilized PFI paradigm and SSVEP techniques will refine efforts to establish the NCC, and various novel designs to address other central questions in cognitive neuroscience, such as the neural basis of attention and consciousness (Tsuchiya and Van Boxtel 2013; van Boxtel and Tsuchiya 2015), and establishment of no-report paradigms (Tsuchiya et al. 2015).


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

All raw data, code reproduce the analysis and code to re-run the experiment are located at https://osf.io/uwxeh/.


Awareness as inference in a higher-order state space

Fleming Stephen M — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7211270, CC BY 4.0.

Neuroscience of Consciousness, Volume 6, Issue 1, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niz020

The first version of this article mislabeled the references to Michel and Morales 2019 and Graziano 2013 on p. 2 and Brown et al. 2019 on p. 7. This is now corrected. The publisher regrets the error.


What binds us? Inter-brain neural synchronization and its implications for theories of human consciousness

Ana Lucía Valencia, Tom Froese — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7288734, CC BY 4.0.

The association between neural oscillations and functional integration is widely recognized in the study of human cognition. Large-scale synchronization of neural activity has also been proposed as the neural basis of consciousness. Intriguingly, a growing number of studies in social cognitive neuroscience reveal that phase synchronization similarly appears across brains during meaningful social interaction. Moreover, this inter-brain synchronization has been associated with subjective reports of social connectedness, engagement, and cooperativeness, as well as experiences of social cohesion and ‘self-other merging’. These findings challenge the standard view of human consciousness as essentially first-person singular and private. We therefore revisit the recent controversy over the possibility of extended consciousness and argue that evidence of inter-brain synchronization in the fastest frequency bands overcomes the hitherto most convincing sceptical position. If this proposal is on the right track, our understanding of human consciousness would be profoundly transformed, and we propose a method to test this proposal experimentally.

Keywords: neural synchronization, hyperscanning, electroencephalography, EEG, social interaction, human mind, consciousness


Introduction

In social cognitive neuroscience, a shift toward embodied, enactive, and participatory approaches has started to take place, moving away from individual brains and focusing on a person’s interaction with the environment. In the context of social cognition a ‘second-person’ approach (Hari and Kujala 2009; Dumas 2011; Hasson et al. 2012; Hari et al. 2013; Schilbach et al. 2013; Redcay and Schilbach 2019) has gained popularity, emphasizing the interactive nature of human cognition (Szymanski et al. 2017; Varela et al. 2017), and even challenging the individualist notion of human experience (Thompson 2001; Hari and Kujala 2009; Torrance 2009; Dumas 2011; Kirchhoff 2014; Froese 2018; Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2019).

These approaches open the space for neuroscience to experimentally address the constitutive role of brain-to-brain relationships in shaping the mind during moment-to-moment interactions (Hari and Kujala 2009; Dumas 2011; Hasson et al. 2012; Redcay and Schilbach 2019). Important philosophical topics, such as collective intentionality (Searle et al. 1990), can therefore be revisited.

However, there is also some notable resistance towards moving into this uncharted territory. Even the principal architect of the hypothesis of the extended mind, Andy Clark, has remained sceptical about whether this hypothesis can be generalized to ‘the extended conscious mind’ (Clark 2009). For Clark, the most promising type of argument appeals to dynamic entanglement plus a unique temporal signature, which is based on a popular class of theories of conscious experience that require very fine-grained processes of temporal coordination to bind together meaningful neural activity. Yet he noted the lack of evidence for such processes operating outside an individual’s nervous system, and hence concluded that the case for the extended conscious mind ‘is at best unproven’ (Clark 2009). A decade on from Clark’s influential assessment it has become clear that the current best evidence from social cognitive neuroscience entails a more optimistic conclusion, with potentially far-reaching implications about what it means to be human.

Behavioural studies in psychology have consistently shown that synchrony during joint action (such as rocking, marching, walking, or dancing) promotes cooperative ability and increases empathy, liking, rapport, and prosocial behaviour (Hari and Kujala 2009; Hove and Risen 2009; Wiltermuth and Heath 2009; Valdesolo et al. 2010; Valdesolo and DeSteno 2011; Mogan et al. 2017). From such studies, it has been suggested that dynamics of neuronal coupling could play an important role in the emergence of such interactive synchrony (Wilson and Wilson 2005; Dumas et al. 2011; Hasson et al. 2012). Importantly, the development of the hyperscanning technique by Montague et al. (2002) has allowed for the measurement and analysis of such inter-brain dynamics (Babiloni and Astolfi 2014; Czeszumski et al. 2020). Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG), hyperscanning paradigms simultaneously record the brain activity of two or more individuals, thus permitting the assessment of neural activity during real-time social interaction (Babiloni and Astolfi 2014; Czeszumski et al. 2020).

In the past, the brain of only one participant in a group or dyad would be recorded at a time, obscuring any emerging phenomena of reciprocal embodied interaction (Dumas 2011; Hasson et al. 2012; Czeszumski et al. 2020). But as Montague very simply phrased it, ‘studying social interactions by scanning the brain of just one person is analogous to studying synapses while observing either the presynaptic neuron or the postsynaptic neuron, but never both simultaneously’ (Montague et al. 2002). Hyperscanning allows for the investigation of neural relations at the intra- and inter-brain level (Schilbach et al. 2013; Czeszumski et al. 2020), making it a relevant technique for understanding the neural basis of social interaction.

Keeping in mind that intra-brain neural oscillations are known to play a critical role in cognitive processes (since they represent the precise timing of neural activity Buzsáki 2006; Sauseng and Klimesch 2008) and, more importantly, that large-scale phase synchronization has further been proposed as the neural basis of consciousness (Crick and Koch 1990; Thompson and Varela 2001; Ward 2003; Engel et al. 2016) (see below), reports of modifications on the ongoing oscillatory activity of several individuals due to social interaction (as measured using EEG-based hyperscanning) have important implications for our study of human behaviour.

This opinion piece aims to examine findings of EEG-based hyperscanning studies and highlight the importance of inter-brain neural synchronization for the study of consciousness. We discuss findings of brain-to-brain synchronization during cooperative social interaction, revealing that this phenomenon is not a general effect of a shared environment, but an emergent property of specifically social dynamics. This, together with the subjective reports of social connectedness and engagement that often accompany said findings, leads to a new outlook regarding the importance of inter-brain neural synchronization in understanding the nature of human consciousness.


Oscillations, synchronization and consciousness

Neural oscillations are considered to be causally responsible for information transfer and integration (Rosenblum et al. 2001; Herrmann et al. 2016) since they can change the functional interactions between areas of the brain (Varela et al. 2001; Buzsáki 2006; Sauseng and Klimesch 2008; Fries 2015; Bonnefond et al. 2017), most probably through phase synchronization (Varela et al. 2001; Ward 2003; Buzsáki 2006; Uhlhaas et al. 2009). Since the phase of an oscillation reflects the exact timing of neural activity (Singer 1993; Buzsáki 2006; Cohen 2014), phase synchronization—both within and across EEG frequency bands—represents a window of functional communication and integration between neuronal populations (Sauseng and Klimesch 2008).

It is established that cognitive processes require the transient coalition of several, widely distributed, and interacting neuronal groups (Thompson and Varela 2001; Ward 2003; Siegel et al. 2012) and that this large-scale dynamical integration is accomplished precisely by phase synchronization of cell assemblies (Hebb 1949; Nicolelis et al. 1997; Rodriguez et al. 1999; Varela et al. 2001; Kelso and Engstrom 2006; Sauseng and Klimesch 2008; Kelso 2009; Tognoli and Kelso 2009; Fries 2015; Engel et al. 2016) (of course, synchronization is not the only mechanism underlying effective cognitive processing; for a discussion on importance of phase desynchronization, see Tognoli and Kelso 2009 and Varela et al. 2001). Analogously, the neural substrates of consciousness may not be localized to a single region or network of a person’s brain (Kelso 1995; Thompson and Varela 2001; Engel et al. 2016). Two decades ago, Crick and Koch (1990) suggested a link between synchronized neural oscillations and consciousness; today several authors support the claim that the neural basis of consciousness (specifically of phenomenal consciousness, i.e., the integrated flow of experience Block 1995) is likely to be at the level of large-scale interactions over several frequency bands of oscillatory neural activity (Engel et al. 1999, Buzsáki 2006; Thompson and Varela 2001; Varela et al. 2001; Ward 2003; Melloni et al. 2007; Uhlhaas et al. 2009; Revonsuo 2014). For example, Llinás suggested that our subjectivity is generated by temporally coherent neural activity (‘It binds, therefore I am’ Llinás 2001), while Engel and Singer proposed that neural synchronization could be the mechanism of different aspects of consciousness, and even what generates the global unity of the self and the world (Engel et al. 1999; Revonsuo 2014).

A large number of evidence further suggest that changes in the patterns of neuronal coherence, both locally and across regions, may lead to changes in mental functioning and the contents of consciousness (Engel et al. 2016). Abnormal oscillatory synchronization has not only been associated with conditions such as epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, essential and cerebellar tremors and coma (Schnitzler and Gross 2005; Buzsáki 2006)—it has also been linked to psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia. Both hallucinatory symptoms and the fragmented nature of these patients’ experience have been related to a disruption of synchronization (Tononi and Edelman 2000; Lisman and Buzsaki 2008; Uhlhaas et al. 2009; Uhlhaas and Singer 2010; Mellin et al. 2018; Ahn et al. 2019).

As a process crucial for consciousness, oscillations can cut across brain–body–world divisions, rather than being limited to neural activity in the head (Thompson and Varela 2001). An interesting and well-known example of their role in guiding cognition and conscious experience in the world is the adjustment of ongoing neural rhythms to external stimuli, also known as phase locking (Sauseng and Klimesch 2008). Critical to synchronization by oscillation (Buzsáki 2006), phase locking to external stimuli has been described as a ‘gating’ mechanism that can amplify or reduce neuronal responses to the events of an information stream (Bonnefond and Jensen 2012). It has also been related to task performance and conscious perception (Lakatos et al. 2008; Bonnefond and Jensen 2012; Ronconi et al. 2017; Solís-Vivanco et al. 2018). Therefore, its results are crucial for a person’s ability to retrieve information about the world and successfully interact with her/his environment (Hasson et al. 2012). In contrast, schizophrenia patients display reduced alignment of neural activity to external stimuli (Lakatos et al. 2008; Lakatos et al. 2013), and it has also been proposed that the disconnection between self and environment in these patients could be due to this abnormality (Lakatos et al. 2013).


Neural synchronization beyond an individual brain

The continuous modification of internal oscillatory dynamics is not limited to an individual’s interaction with the physical environment. A growing body of research examining neuronal processes in interacting individuals has revealed that social dynamics also play an important role in neuronal rhythms (Balconi and Vanutelli 2017; Stevens and Galloway 2017; Mu et al. 2018). For example, studies have revealed that individuals on the autistic spectrum disorder, who often have substantial problems connecting socially (Hari and Kujala 2009; Marsh et al. 2013; Redcay and Schilbach 2019), show a lack of neural synchronization with others (Tanabe et al. 2012; Salmi et al. 2013).

Furthermore, tasks requiring cooperation, coordination and joint attention in non-clinical individuals demonstrate that greater inter-brain oscillatory synchronization is associated with enhanced performance and can predict team efficiency (Mu et al. 2017; Szymanski et al. 2017; Balconi and Vanutelli 2018), and that tasks with a greater need for cooperation are associated with a higher level of inter-brain synchronization (Bezerianos et al. 2015; Mu et al. 2016; Sinha et al. 2016; Mu et al. 2017; Szymanski et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018).

The behavioural gains associated with higher inter-brain synchronization subsequently make hyperscanning, and in particular EEG-based hyperscanning (Hari and Kujala 2009), specifically relevant for evaluating the neural oscillatory dynamics associated with social interactions (Liu et al. 2018).

As with other techniques, EEG-based hyperscanning is carried out during a real-time interaction paradigm (Babiloni and Astolfi 2014). Most commonly the paradigms used include tasks such as playing guitars in duets (Lindenberger et al. 2009; Sänger et al. 2012), imitation tasks (Dumas et al. 2010; Yun et al. 2012), visual search tasks (Szymanski et al. 2017), cooperation–competition games (Astolfi et al. 2010; De Vico Fallani et al. 2010; Cui et al. 2012; Sinha et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018), verbal or motor interaction (Pérez et al. 2017), amongst others (for reviews see: Dumas et al. 2011; Babiloni and Astolfi 2014; Balconi and Vanutelli 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Czeszumski et al. 2020). Each member of the group or dyad is instrumented with the desired scalp electrode channels from separate EEG devices, and all devices are controlled through an online server (so as to make sure neural recordings run in parallel). A key advantage of EEG-based hyperscanning is that it is capable of maintaining high ecological validity, while capturing changes in the phase relationship between oscillatory signals of individual brains in the millisecond range (Mu et al. 2018; Czeszumski et al. 2020).

Inter-brain phase synchronization analysis under this technique uses adapted versions of intra-brain estimators, such as the Phase Locking Value (PLV) (Lachaux et al. 1999), Inter-brain Phase Coherence (IPC) (Lindenberger et al. 2009), and Partial Directed Coherence (PDC) (Astolfi et al. 2010). While PLV and IPC are measures of similarity between neural signals, PDC is used to estimate causal links between brains (Czeszumski et al. 2020). Other measures used include the Circular Correlation Coefficient (Ccorr), Coherence (COH) measure, Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient, Spearman’s Correlation Coefficient, Total Interdependence (TI, and Wavelet Transform Coherence (WTC). Each estimator has advantages and limitations (Burgess 2013; Czeszumski et al. 2020); if used properly, they can reveal the existence of a functional relationship between neural signals of individual brains.


The functional meaning of inter-brain synchronization

‘True’ synchronization occurs when two oscillators reciprocally adjust their ongoing rhythms due to interaction, serving as a reliable marker of information flow between the elements of a system (Rosenblum et al. 2001; Burgess 2013). Thus, and this is key, inter-brain phase synchronization of neural activity potentially indicates functional integration across brains.

Nevertheless, ‘false’ synchronization between brain signals might appear, such as when oscillators are driven by an external influence, or when there is a coincidental phase relationship between individual rhythms. Therefore, careful consideration must be taken before formulating conclusions about their explanatory power (Burgess 2013). Induced synchrony (as opposed to true synchronization) could occur when participants are exposed to the same perceptual stimulus or exhibit similarity of movements, even without actually interacting with one another (Kaneshiro et al. 2020). Therefore, it can be difficult to conclude if synchrony is due to similar dynamics of individual brains driven by a shared perceptual context or if it is an emergent property of social interaction.

Fortunately, most hyperscanning studies today do not simply measure phase synchronization between individuals but compare it between different experimental conditions. To control for induced synchrony, experimental conditions remain identical in every way possible, except for one where participants are socially engaged and another when they are not (Burgess 2013). Many studies additionally use random pair analysis to account for spurious synchronization due to a shared environment (Osaka et al. 2015; Toppi et al. 2016). This analysis compares brain signals from real pairs of subjects (from those who did interact during the task) with signals from ‘random’ or ‘non-pairs’ (from pairs generated randomly based on their role in the task and not the actual pair they were a part of). By doing so, only the emergent neural synchronization that was due real interaction survives the analysis (Bilek et al. 2015; Osaka et al. 2015; Toppi et al. 2016).


True synchronization is associated with cooperation

Besides revealing that synchronized brain activity is neither due to a shared environment (Dikker et al. 2017) nor to similarities in stimulus input or motor output (Sänger et al. 2012; Pérez et al. 2017), EEG-based hyperscanning studies show that functional links appear across participant’s brains during cooperation, but not during competition or individual—yet simultaneous—task performance (De Vico Fallani et al. 2010; Mu et al. 2016; Sinha et al. 2016; Mu et al. 2017; Szymanski et al. 2017; Balconi and Vanutelli 2018a, b) (note that this link is not only observed with EEG-based hyperscanning;). For example, pilots and co-pilots in flight simulations (where the environment remains the same, but the need for cooperation varies throughout the task) exhibit high inter-brain connectivity during cooperative phases (takeoff and landing); such interconnections break down during cruise, when the two participants act independently (Toppi et al. 2016). Another clue that such findings are not due to confounding factors (Burgess 2013) but are instead a marker of real synchronization, connectivity between random couples proved non-significant compared to real couples (Toppi et al. 2016). More interestingly, non-cooperative interactions can be predicted during the decision-making phase of a computerized cooperation–competition game, where individuals can either decide to cooperate, defect `or choose a ‘tit-for-tat’ strategy (punish the other player for previous non-cooperative behavior). Prior to making the decision, defector couples already show significantly less inter-brain connectivity than couples playing cooperative or tit-for-tat strategies (De Vico Fallani et al. 2010). Interestingly, it has been suggested that this task requires a higher understanding of the other’s intentions when participants decide to cooperate or punish (Czeszumski et al. 2020).


Box 1. Beyond EEG

The type of results described in this article is not limited to the EEG-based hyperscanning technique; MEG, fMRI and fNIRS hyperscanning studies reveal similar findings. Reviewing them all is beyond the purpose of this work. However, we recognize their importance in providing a more complete picture of the brain’s activity during social interaction and emphasize the relevance of future multimodal recording and analysis.

Of particular relevance for oscillatory dynamics, fNIRS-based hyperscanning studies, which do not directly register electrical dynamics but can uncover locally phase-locked neural behaviour, show that higher inter-brain neural synchronization is observed when, for example, participants play a computer game side by side and are required to cooperate, but not when they are required to play against each other (Cui et al. 2012).

The pioneering study by Funane et al. (2011) revealed that the spatiotemporal coherence of inter-brain signals in paired participants was associated with cooperative performance. Participants were instructed to mentally count to 10 after an auditory cue, and then simultaneously press a button. When the brain-activity patterns during the counting period were more synchronized, the time interval between their button-presses was shorter, a result not explained in terms of a motion artefact.

Greater neural synchronization also appeared between subjects completing a puzzle together, compared to when the same subjects completed identical puzzles individually, or watched others complete the puzzle (in front of them or through video recording) (Fishburn et al. 2018). A similar study revealed inter-brain synchronization between two individuals when singing together, but not when singing individually yet close to each other (this effect was not observed in random pairs) (Osaka et al. 2015).

Additionally, not only does cooperation foster inter-brain synchronization; it appears that believing you are ‘part of the same team’ has also an effect on hyper-connectivity. In a study with four participants playing a card game in two competing teams (where, to control for motor activity, experimenters assisted the participants on moving the cards), strong functional connectivity was observed between subjects belonging to the same team, but not between subjects from different teams (Astolfi et al. 2010). Similarly, pairs exposed to a context that represents an in-group threat have higher levels of inter-brain synchronization during a coordination task than those exposed to out-group threats or in-group no-threat control conditions. Importantly, this connectivity only appears when pairs are required to coordinate with a human partner and not a computer (Mu et al. 2017).

Moreover, a recent study revealed that participants playing a cooperation game face-to-face exhibit differences in brain-to-brain synchronization when they believe they are interacting with each other compared to when they believe their interaction is with a computer. In this experimental setup, the prompts ‘your partner is a human’ and ‘your partner is a computer’ were provided before each condition (human–human or human–machine), and every dyad went through both conditions in the same session. Even though in both conditions the interaction was with the partner, believing otherwise had a strong effect on hyper-connectivity (Hu et al. 2018). This may reflect the effects of different levels of engagement (Schilbach et al. 2013).

If, under correct experimental setups, hyperscanning studies are revealing reliable markers of oscillatory synchronization, then it appears that, just as in an individual brain, the dynamics of neural activity during interaction could provide functional integration between the interacting parts—across brains (Kelso and Engstrom 2006; Stevens and Galloway 2016, Stevens et al. 2017). This is supported by one of the most interesting, yet lesser explored aspects of EEG-based hyperscanning studies: an association between inter-brain neural synchronization and participants’ conscious experiences related to social cohesion.


Inter-brain synchronization and subjective experience of social closeness

Although several experimental paradigms do not explicitly take into account participant’s experience (Balconi and Vanutelli 2017), those that do have yielded interesting results. First, feelings of cooperativeness between participants appear to mediate the level of neural synchronization during cooperation (Hu et al. 2018). Additionally, feelings of engagement, affinity, empathy and social closeness can be predicted by the level of inter-brain synchronization (Dikker et al. 2017; Bevilacqua et al. 2019). Neural synchronization across pairs is also negatively associated with an individual’s reported attachment anxiety (Kinreich et al. 2017) and experience of pain, while it is positively associated with accurately rating another person’s pain experience (Goldstein et al. 2018). Interestingly, the feeling of another person’s touch or pain has been repeatedly reported in intra-brain studies, where a person’s own affective pain circuitry is activated while viewing another person receive painful stimuli (Hari and Kujala 2009). More importantly, shared pain experience has also been related to self-other confusion (Derbyshire et al. 2013) and appears to be absent in people in the autistic spectrum disorder (Minio-Paluello et al. 2009), which further supports brain-to-brain synchronization as a mechanism for sharing a social world (Hasson et al. 2012).

Moreover, the nature of the association between participants has an effect on neural synchronization (Pan et al. 2017) and the context under which it appears. During naturalistic nonverbal social interaction (gaze and positive affect), inter-brain neural synchronization appears selectively among romantic couples and not among strangers (this result is unrelated to other factors, such as verbal communication) (Kinreich et al. 2017).

These findings, summarized in, are consistent with behavioural studies that reveal that movement synchronization plays an important role in social cohesion (McNeill 1997; Valdesolo et al. 2010; Valdesolo and DeSteno 2011) and is associated with higher levels of empathy (Goldstein et al. 2017), less sensitivity to pain perception (Cohen et al. 2010) and experiences of self-other merging (Rabinowitch and Knafo-Noam 2015; Novembre et al. 2016; Galbusera et al. 2019)—on being ‘on the same wavelength’ with someone (Hari and Kujala 2009). More importantly, the changes in an individual’s conscious experience of social closeness that accompany hyper-connectivity are relevant for understanding the interactive nature of human cognition within a ‘second-person neuroscience’ (Schilbach et al. 2013; Varela et al. 2017) and can have important implications for our understanding of the social dimension of human consciousness and for better treating its disorders (Schilbach 2016; Redcay and Schilbach 2019).


Beyond individualist theories of consciousness

If the basis of consciousness is at the level of large-scale interactions of neural oscillatory activity (Crick and Koch 1990; Thompson and Varela 2001; Varela et al. 2001; Ward 2003; Engel et al. 2016), the modifications of oscillations that appear during meaningful social interaction—and their relation to the experiences of social closeness—result in a shift in our understanding of human consciousness. Although a still debated proposal (Clark 2009, Ward 2012; Kirchhoff 2014; Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2019), an ‘extension of consciousness’ could be possible in light of these findings.

Enactive and participatory approaches to social cognitive neuroscience view cognition as an interactive process, challenging the individualist notion of the human mind (Clark and Chalmers 1998; De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007; Torrance 2009; Kirchhoff 2014; Varela et al. 2017; Froese 2018; Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2019). These approaches establish the association between an individual, the world and others in terms of non-linear interactive dynamics (Beer 2000; Froese and Ikegami 2013). The boundaries that distinguish self from other, instead of being fixed and hard won, are under constant renegotiation (Clark and Chalmers 1998; Kirchhoff 2014; Kirchhoff and Kiverstein 2019); they are observed as a result of self-organizing processes, which can also occur at a social level depending on the nature of the interaction (De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007; Galbusera et al. 2019). Interestingly, the inter-brain synchronization found—at least in the studies considered in —does not appear to have an overall frequency-, region- or task-specificity. This potentially places embodied interpersonal interaction in general as playing a fundamental role in shaping joint experience and moves social cognition away from the head (Thompson and Varela 2001; Froese and Ikegami 2013).

Considering this, the impact of meaningful social interaction on individual’s self-organizing processes (i.e. ongoing neural oscillations) and, more importantly, the appearance of true phase synchronization between brains (a key coordination variable between interacting dynamical systems Kelso and Engstrom 2006) support the suggestion that when several agents interact, a form of social self-organization could take place, with properties irreducible to the individuals (De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007; Froese et al. 2014; Galbusera et al. 2019). Consequently, the boundaries consciousness could also be under renegotiation during meaningful social interaction.

The main objection to this argument, put forward by Clark (2009), is that consciousness cannot extend outside an individual brain since it requires processes occurring on such a fast temporal scale that neural activity proves to be the only adequate ‘vehicle’. Moreover, the person’s body will act as a ‘low-pass filter’, ultimately ‘screening off’ all non-neural body and environmental elements from being part of the material realizers of conscious experience. Therefore, entering signals can only play a casual, yet not constitutive, role (Clark 2009).

First, to be clear, when referring to an ‘extension of consciousness’, we are not suggesting that consciousness does not have any neural basis. Human consciousness requires mechanisms occurring within the brain (Thompson and Varela 2001; Engel et al. 2016); nevertheless, neural activity is also embodied in an individual’s interaction in and with the world (Buzsáki 2006; Noë 2009), including with other people (Hari and Kujala 2009). More importantly, inter-brain neural synchronization, as revealed through EEG-based hyperscanning studies, appears in all oscillatory frequency bands, including the faster gamma frequency (Astolfi et al. 2010; Dumas et al. 2010; Kinreich et al. 2017; Mu et al. 2017). There is therefore no empirical reason to limit the basis of conscious experience to very fast neural activity occurring within a single brain.

Additionally, communication within a single brain uses the hierarchical nesting of oscillations, where faster frequencies are embedded in, and modulated by, slower rhythms (Buzsáki 2006; Buzsáki and Draguhn 2004; Bonnefond et al. 2017). This line of reasoning can be extended to the even slower timescales of embodied action in the world (Haken 1980; Kelso 2009; Van Orden et al. 2012; Haken 2013). In this sense, even if the body acted as a ‘low-pass filter’, it remains possible for embodied social interaction to work as a slower rhythm in which neuronal oscillations become nested across two or more people (Hasson et al. 2012), and thus foster ‘interpersonal synergies’ (Riley et al. 2011; Hasson et al. 2012).

By eliminating Clark’s frequency-based objection, we propose that the boundaries of the conscious mind could also be subject to constant renegotiation during an individual’s interaction with his/her environment and with others, pointing to a mechanism that neurally binds us together and opens us up to an extended conscious mind in social interaction (Kelso and Engstrom 2006). An upshot of this proposal is that it can potentially validate our most intimate experiences: when we become aware that ‘we’ are sharing a moment with someone else, it is no longer necessarily the case that we are fundamentally separated by our distinct heads—we could really be two distinct individuals sharing in one and the same unfolding experience (Froese 2018).

The consequence of Clark’s claim that fast temporal integration of neural activity delimits the basis of consciousness, when viewed from the latest hyperscanning evidence, is that this basis can indeed become extended across two brains during social interaction. For Clark, and for us, this is a constitutive claim, not a causal claim. Importantly, this does not necessarily mean that individual perspectives will be obliterated and merged into a single supra-individual perspective (Stapleton and Froese 2015). We propose that the fact that the basis of an individual’s perspective now integrates some neural activity from another person’s brain provides a suitable explanation for the qualitative experiential transition from a purely first-person perspective to a second-person perspective, which is also sometimes referred to as the ‘we’ perspective (Zahavi 2015). If this proposal is on the right track, then there could be a genuinely collective basis to collective intentionality (Searle et al. 1990), thereby overcoming difficulties stemming from the individualist assumption of traditional theories in philosophy. There are also experimental consequences: presumably, the larger the cross-brain neural integration, the larger the qualitative sense of sharing an experience together, and this could potentially be tested.


Testing the hypothesis: a possible experimental setup

We have proposed that inter-brain phase synchronization of neural oscillatory is a candidate mechanism for the conscious extended mind, potentially explaining the known association of synchronization with the feeling of being together with someone else. Although consciousness is notoriously difficult to investigate scientifically, here we suggest that our proposal could be experimentally tested through transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS). Arguably, the best method known to date that assesses the causality of brain oscillations in human cognition (Cohen 2014), tACS can directly modulate the ongoing rhythms of neural activity in an individual brain by passing an electrical current between two electrodes placed on the scalp, entraining specific oscillations and thereby influencing cognitive processes (Cohen 2014; Zaehle et al. 2010; Helfrich et al. 2014; Herrmann et al. 2013) and large-scale network dynamics (Ali et al. 2013).

When used in individual brains, this method has been reported to induce changes in subjective experience (Meiron and Lavidor 2014), such as self-awareness (Voss et al. 2014). In addition, its therapeutic applications on individuals with disorders of consciousness, such as on patients with schizophrenia, are already demonstrated (Kallel et al. 2016; Mellin et al. 2018; Ahn et al. 2019). These findings support this method’s relevance for investigating the extension of consciousness during social interaction.

From the available literature it appears that simultaneous brain stimulation, or hyper-tACS, is associated with an enhancement of interpersonal movement synchrony (Novembre et al. 2017). In a study conducted by Novembre et al. (2017), in-phase 20 Hz stimulation across two individuals’ motor cortices enhanced behavioural synchrony in a joint finger-tapping task, compared with anti-phase or sham stimulation. This was seen even after controlling for stimulus induced synchronization and performing random pair analysis (Novembre et al. 2017).

Under a setup of social interaction similar to those utilized in the aforementioned EEG-based hyperscanning studies (where true synchronization between participant’s brains takes place (Burgess 2013), hyper-tACS could be used to either enhance or diminish pre-existing inter-brain synchronization during a cooperative task to study its effects on the participant’s subjective experience of social connectedness and engagement. We expect that hyper-tACS conditions that foster brain-to-brain synchronization during cooperative action would lead to higher experienced cohesion, compared to hyper-tACS conditions that inhibit neural synchronization across participant’s brains.

tACS-EEG co-registration is still in its early stages, but promises to ‘open a new frontier in oscillatory brain rhythms investigations’ (Feurra et al. 2012). Even though there is no established hyper-tACS/EEG method to date, it has proven an effective method for manipulating on-going inter-brain phase synchronization during joint action (Novembre et al. 2017; Szymanski et al. 2017). However, results are still inconclusive. As opposed to Novembre’s study, Szymanski et al. (2017) found that only dyadic performance asynchrony, compared to dyadic synchrony and individual synchronization to a metronome, was modulated by hyper-tACS. Due to tACS dependence on the power of individual endogenous oscillations at the targeted frequency (Ruhnau et al. 2016), this study’s electrode placement left room for individual differences within each dyad, so unique dyad differences might have resulted in an unprecise inter-brain phase synchronization.

Further hyper-tACS studies, with more precise stimulation protocols, are needed in order to ensure that oscillations in the same frequencies are synchronized in the brains of individuals engaged in social interaction (Szymanski et al. 2017). Only then could the subjective experience of social connectedness be manipulated in a valid experimental setup. If this turned out to be the case, it would establish inter-brain neural synchronization as the basis for the conscious extended mind, at least for situations where it matters most—during meaningful social interaction.


Conclusion

An influential position in the philosophy of mind articulated by Clark had appealed to the lack of empirical evidence regarding very fast binding processes outside the nervous system to conclude that the possibility of the conscious extended mind is at best unproven. As we have shown, the current evidence no longer supports such a sceptical assessment. With these theoretical doubts removed, we conclude that the time is right to marshal the best contemporary hyperscanning practices in cognitive neuroscience in order to move beyond the still widespread traditional assumption that all aspects of consciousness are necessarily private and first-person singular. It is time to bring the sciences of the mind in line with the social nature of human experience.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Spotlight commentary: REBUS and the anarchic brain

Tehseen Noorani, Ben Alderson-Day — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7290155, CC BY 4.0.

In ‘REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Towards a Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics’, Carhart-Harris and Friston offer an important analysis of what the predictive processing framework has to offer our understanding of psychedelic experiences, providing an invaluable ground for psychedelic psychiatry. While applauding this, we encourage paying greater attention to contextual factors shaping extreme experiences and their sequalae, and suggest that the authors’ comparisons with certain non-psychedelic altered states may overlook more informative parallels that can be drawn elsewhere. Addressing both points will prove fruitful, ultimately, in identifying the mechanisms of action of greatest interest in psychedelic experiences.

In ‘REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Towards a Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics’, Carhart-Harris and Friston (CH&F) present a model of relaxed beliefs under psychedelics (REBUS) and the anarchic brain. In relation to psychedelia, predictive coding approaches represent the latest shift in use of technological metaphors that have included Aldous Huxley’s reducing ‘valve’ and Timothy Leary’s eight ‘circuits’ of the brain. By analysing psychedelic experiences and analogous altered states in terms of predictive processing, CH&F integrate their respective research into the entropic brain hypothesis and the free-energy principle (317). We applaud this article as a seminal attempt to establish what the predictive processing framework (PPF) has to offer our understanding of the psychedelic experience, providing an invaluable ground for psychedelic psychiatry research moving forwards. At the same time, we caution that it may recapitulate extant biases in scientific research into experience. In particular, we are concerned that (i) insufficient attention is given to the practices and frameworks utilized when entering into extreme experiences, and (ii) overly simplistic comparisons with certain non-psychedelic altered states may obscure and overlook some more informative parallels that can be drawn elsewhere. We suggest that addressing both points will prove fruitful, ultimately, in identifying the mechanisms of action of greatest interest in the psychedelic experience.

Much of CH&F’s review centres on the role of different brain networks in the psychedelic state, as viewed through the lens of the free-energy principle. The ‘default mode network’ (DMN), central to this analysis, is typically associated with internally focused attention, and subjective states such as rumination and reflection. Psychedelics have been shown in recent years to disrupt the functioning of the DMN. Citing research suggesting the main hubs of the DMN are functionally positioned as far as possible from sensorimotor input (Margulies et al. 2016), the authors propose that the DMN corresponds to the highest levels of prior expectation and knowledge; accordingly, the authors take the DMN to be central to the seat of the self. This assumption shapes how psychedelic mechanisms of action are recast within the PPF:

…we propose that the brain’s highest levels provide an implicit, centralizing, and generalized compression of (potential) information held within and processed by subordinate levels; i.e., the high or deep hierarchical levels furnish beliefs about abstract, domain-general narratives regarding the world qualities of self and states of being (323, our emphasis).

However, the DMN has been implicated in a vast range of experiences and conditions, including almost every broad category of pathology. This has made it useful for constructing new hypotheses and theories (Alderson-Day and Callard 2016) – but mysterious objects of investigation can be all things to all researchers. For instance, the DMN has been closely associated with how we think about others, supporting theory of mind, the narrative self and self-other judgements central to social functioning (Spreng and Andrews-Hanna 2015). Rather than looking to the self or ego, we wonder whether the REBUS model may be just as enriched by social identity, personhood or belonging at the top of a proposed ‘hierarchy’ of priors (Moutoussis et al. 2014). Put another way, are we the driver of our core expectations, or are others?

One of the appeals of the PPF is its ability to account for subjective experience beyond the confines of the individual. Given the call to move beyond individualistic research paradigms from prominent researchers within psychedelic science (e.g. Vollenweider 2017), it is a lost opportunity for the authors to imply that hierarchical models of the mind end with the individual. Instead, we might look for how the conception of self is shaped at every level by one’s social interactions and ideas of a ‘social other’.

Attending to contextual factors is a well-trodden path in relation to psychedelic drug action. Over 35 years ago, Dobkin de Rios (1984, 4) proposed ‘to build a theory of drug effects that takes into account the importance of antecedent cultural variables so as to predict such effects’. Today it is accepted that context is central to the psychedelic experience, and the bulk of psychedelic researchers and therapists consider the therapeutic scaffolding of the psychedelic experience to be central in constituting the experience.

Yet it remains difficult to gain objective data about psychedelic effects in contexts outside of tightly regulated clinical administration (cf. Studerus et al. 2012). In their reconceptualization of the psychopharmacological doxa of ‘set and setting’ through the PPF, CH&F note that psychedelic effects result from more than the mere loosening of priors (e.g. they can come from the limbic system or interoceptive signals). However, we suggest they do not pay enough attention to the expectation-constituting role that contextual factors play in shaping priors, for not only surprising or insightful, but also confirmatory experiences. Given how important preparation, set and setting are for the impressive clinical outcomes, and the centrality of integration in the emerging consensus amongst psychedelic researchers that ‘there is no such thing as a bad trip’, it is a strange omission that the authors do not attend more to normative and social drivers when theorizing how people respond to psychedelics.

Psychedelic researchers could learn from hallucinations researchers’ interest in developing models beyond the confines of the acute experiences, such as ‘non-clinical’ voice-hearers. For example, Luhrmann (2012) has documented how evangelicals learn to hear the voice of God, precisely because of a pre-existing framework that identifies any voices experienced as not coming from the self as coming instead from God (on non-clinical voice-hearing, see also Powers et al. 2017). This may also take deliberate and repeated practice – building a strong set of socially situated expectations about the oncoming wave of the ‘unexpected’. Analogies can be drawn to the frameworks delimiting the effects of drug administration, which are conferred by the preparation and context of psychedelic drug use. Luhrmann’s analysis illustrates the value of understanding pre-existing frameworks delimiting the set of expected possibilities (and impossibilities) before one enters into an altered state.

By not giving context its due, CH&F risk drawing some parochial conclusions, such as that psychedelic experiences bring about the loosening of ‘partisan and/or overly-confident political, religious and/or philosophical perspectives’ (317). This is a commonly held view, but it is contradicted by historical and cross-cultural evidence of the use of psychedelics in shoring up strong belief systems (e.g. Piper 2015). Taking leave from the structural analogy of intention and preparation in evangelicals, could the effects of psychedelics be equally well understood as the strengthening of healthy and intention-laden priors as the loosening of pathogenic ones?

Instead of comparing the psychedelic experience with those groups who have voluntarily chosen to entered altered and unusual states, CH&F’s primary point of comparison is with the early stages of psychosis. In contrast to recent approaches which posit a role for strong priors in the development of psychosis (Adams et al. 2013, see also in relation to hallucinations, Corlett et al. 2018), they propose that psychedelic states and early psychotic experiences share a similar loosening of higher-level priors (with expectations becoming calcified only later for people with psychosis). Their reasoning for this lies in disruptions to a sense of self, and a generalized feeling of anxiety – an account which is reminiscent of the ‘basic symptoms’ of schizophrenia proposed by phenomenological psychopathology. We worry, though, that it again leaves out the role of the other, i.e. the social context, and emerging social threat, which features again and again in early psychosis. Here, the spiral of strong, negative expectations seems to provide more dis-analogy than analogy with transformative and positive psychedelic states.

The dis-analogy between psychedelic trial participants at the pre-dosing stage and people unaware of an upcoming psychotic break is important not just for the acute experience, but also for what comes afterwards. CH&F propose that any delusions that do occur in relation to psychedelics use only do so during the acute psychedelic experiences, as a way to ‘close out uncertainty’ (328) created by the relaxed precision weighting of priors. Yet the role of integration in the post-acute period following psychedelic administration is considered crucial for therapeutic gain, while the potential harms from no or poor-quality support is understudied, owing to a focus in research trials on isolating the effects of the drugs and ethical imperatives to provide substantial care in integrating psychedelic experiences. It is not known currently what role downstream support – either during integration practices or between successive psychedelic experiences – plays in the potential emergence of delusional ideation. Investigating this and its relationship with the naturalistic onset of delusions (e.g. Freeman et al. 2019) requires longitudinal research that carefully attends to the context of lived experience.

Psychedelic researchers will continue to wrestle with the tension between offering a parsimonious analytics to explain psychedelic experiences, and the diversity and elusiveness of the latter. Accordingly, we admire the scale of what CH&F offer in their REBUS model, while suggesting a need to rebalance – perhaps away from parsimony. In order to realize its potential to explain a range of unusual and fantastic states within a single framework, the PPF must take the social situatedness of experience seriously. This requires attending to the context of psychedelics use and integration in order to better understand whether and how expectations might be reinforced rather than confounded. We have suggested that comparison with non-clinical groups who seek out unusual states may be more fruitful in these regards, whereas a more detailed consideration of pathological states such as psychosis is liable to reveal dis-analogies. If the PPF does not grapple with such considerations, we risk conceptualizing the variety of psychedelic states – from visions to desires and musings to rapture – through a ‘desert landscape’ (Clark 2013, 200) of an individual’s prior and precision only. By contrast, any explanatory framework purporting to explain psychedelic experiences ought to retain their richness and transformative power. To this end, PPF advocates would do well to supply context for relaxed priors in terms of their content, particularly with regards to prior beliefs about the self in relation to others.


A systematic investigation of the association between network dynamics in the human brain and the state of consciousness

Julia S Crone, Evan S Lutkenhoff, Paul M Vespa, Martin M Monti — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7293819, CC BY 4.0.

An increasing amount of studies suggest that brain dynamics measured with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are related to the state of consciousness. However, the challenge of investigating neuronal correlates of consciousness is the confounding interference between (recovery of) consciousness and behavioral responsiveness. To address this issue, and validate the interpretation of prior work linking brain dynamics and consciousness, we performed a longitudinal fMRI study in patients recovering from coma. Patients were assessed twice, 6 months apart, and assigned to one of two groups. One group included patients who were unconscious at the first assessment but regained consciousness and improved behavioral responsiveness by the second assessment. The other group included patients who were already conscious and improved only behavioral responsiveness. While the two groups were matched in terms of the average increase in behavioral responsiveness, only one group experienced a categorical change in their state of consciousness allowing us to partially dissociate consciousness and behavioral responsiveness. We find the variance in network metrics to be systematically different across states of consciousness, both within and across groups. Specifically, at the first assessment, conscious patients exhibited significantly greater variance in network metrics than unconscious patients, a difference that disappeared once all patients had recovered consciousness. Furthermore, we find a significant increase in dynamics for patients who regained consciousness over time, but not for patients who only improved responsiveness. These findings suggest that changes in brain dynamics are indeed linked to the state of consciousness and not just to a general level of behavioral responsiveness.


Introduction

The embodiment of the brains’ billions of neurons creates a complex entity across space and time that allows the human mind to be conscious of itself and its environment. Despite major efforts in the past decades to understand neuronal mechanisms underlying processes of consciousness, our understanding of these complex relationships is still elusive. Nevertheless, a large body of work demonstrates that the functional organization of brain regions including frontal and medial posterior areas, the thalamus, and the globus pallidus are altered in impaired states of consciousness in patients (Laureys et al. 1999, Adams et al. 2000; Schiff 2008, Fernandez-Espejo et al. 2010, Lull et al. 2010; Vanhaudenhuyse et al. 2010; Zhou et al. 2011; Crone et al. 2014, Hannawi et al. 2015; Lutkenhoff et al. 2015) as well as in anesthetized healthy subjects (Fiset et al. 1999; White and Alkire 2003; Greicius et al. 2008; Boveroux et al. 2010; Deshpande et al. 2010; Mhuircheartaigh et al. 2010; Guldenmund et al. 2013; Ranft et al. 2016). It is no coincidence that all of these regions are part of the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuit known to be involved in regulating a critical balance of excitation and inhibition necessary for cortical arousal, motor control, and high-level cognition (Middleton and Strick 2000; Van der Werf et al. 2003; Gerardin et al. 2004; Nambu 2008; Schiff 2008; Qiu et al. 2010; Vetrivelan et al. 2010; Bor and Seth 2012; Lazarus et al. 2012; Leech and Sharp 2014; Halassa and Kastner 2017; Schmitt et al. 2017). Recent approaches, however, shifted their focus from the rather restricted view of the “where” to the more sophisticated “how” focusing on the relation of information to its embodiment rather than locating function based on the notion that the emergence of consciousness is best understood if the complex network interactions are quantified at a spatio-temporal scale (Hoel et al. 2013). A previous investigation suggests that the temporal dimension of network connectivity, i.e., alterations in spatial distribution of connectivity patterns over time, specifically represent fluctuations in basic brain states of wakefulness or consciousness (Laumann et al. 2018). Indeed, measures of complexity and dynamics have been shown to distinguish states of consciousness in a range of different experimental settings including sleep, anesthesia, and patients with severe brain injury (Massimini et al. 2005; Casali et al. 2013; Chang et al. 2013; Hutchison et al. 2013, Amico et al. 2014; Hall et al. 2014; Tagliazucchi et al. 2014; Tagliazucchi and Laufs 2014; Barttfeld et al. 2015; Hudetz et al. 2015, Sarasso et al. 2015; Laumann et al. 2018; Rosanova et al.2018) including a very recent large-sample publication (Demertzi et al. 2019). However, in each of these experimental designs, changes in the state of consciousness are also closely associated with changing levels of behavioral responsiveness and cognitive abilities as well as other non-cognitive processes of transition. Independent of the specific metric used to measure brain dynamics, this intertwining association makes it difficult to draw straightforward conclusions regarding the relationship of brain function and consciousness itself, thus limiting the interpretation of these findings. Despite it being common practice to interpret these metrics as revealing changes in states of consciousness, it remains yet to be proven that they are not just a (partial or complete) reflection of changes in behavioral responsiveness.

In this study, we address this issue by adopting an approach that allows to dissociate the state of consciousness from the level of behavioral responsiveness (i.e., the level of residual cognitive function, as well as arousal and motor control as measured with standardized behavioral protocols). Implementing this approach, we assess the dynamics of network properties at the whole brain level and within the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. We were able to acquire a rare data set of two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) sessions (acute and follow-up) as part of a longitudinal study in patients who recovered from coma after severe brain injury to a state of wakefulness with either no or only reduced conscious behavior. The patients underwent standardized behavioral evaluation and functional neuroimaging early post-injury (within the first ∼7 days; acute session) and 6 months later (follow-up session). Within this sample, some patients were unconscious at the acute session and, by the follow-up session, had regained both consciousness and behavioral responsiveness (unconscious–conscious group). The other patients, in contrast, could already demonstrate a state of consciousness — if minimal — at the acute session and had improved further behavioral responsiveness by the follow-up session (conscious–conscious group). Crucially, the feature that allows disentangling recovery of consciousness from recovery of behavioral responsiveness is that our sample includes two groups of patients which differ in their (binary/qualitative) state of consciousness (Bayne et al. 2016) but not in their (continuous/quantitative) gain of behavioral responsiveness over time.

Given the above, we can make a set of straightforward hypotheses regarding a group of four comparisons, as to which pattern of results would validate previous assumptions that brain dynamics reflect one’s state of consciousness and not just behavioral responsiveness (including implied residual cognitive function). Specifically, if the state of consciousness is the driving factor underlying brain dynamics, we ought to observe (i) a significant difference between the two groups at the acute session (since the state of consciousness differs between the groups) but no significant difference at follow-up (since all patients had recovered consciousness by then), as well as (ii) a significant difference over time for the unconscious–conscious group (since the state of consciousness of these patients changed across sessions) but no significant difference over time for the conscious–conscious group (since the state of consciousness of these patients did not change across sessions) — see pattern A in. In contrast, if brain dynamics are mainly driven by the level of behavioral responsiveness, we expect significant differences for both between assessments and between groups — see pattern B in. In the case that we find significant differences between groups at the follow-up session (since patients in both groups are conscious) or between sessions in the conscious–conscious group (since the state of consciousness did not change), the state of consciousness can be ruled out as the main driving factor underlying changes in time-varying network organization.


Materials and Methods


Patient population

Patients were recruited as part of the UCLA Brain Injury Research Center (BIRC). Inclusion criteria were an admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Teasdale and Jennett 1974) score of below 8 or an admission GCS of 9–14 with computerized tomography brain scans demonstrating intracranial bleeding, in addition to a stable condition. The main exclusion criteria were a GCS score of above 8 with a non-significant computerized tomography brain scan, history of neurological disease or injury, brain death, and unsuitability to enter the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) environment (e.g. due to any non MRI-safe implant or medical restrictions). Informed written consent was obtained from the patient’s legal representative. The study was approved by the UCLA institutional review board. For this study, we investigated 55 patients including only patients who were scanned during the acute stage of injury [within 14 days (mean = 7.33) after injury] as well as during the follow-up stage (6 months after injury) and who have recovered consciousness at the follow-up assessment. However, we excluded patients exceeding the threshold for motion (see Motion section) as well as subjects with severe deformation of the head for which we do not expect sufficient registration results. Hence, we excluded 37 of the initial cohort of 55 patients with severe traumatic brain injury resulting in a total of 18 patients [10 male; mean age = 38 years (SD = 17 years); see for details on each subject]. The unusual high number of exclusions was necessary to obtain a sample of patients with high-quality data in order to perform reliable resting-state analyses (comparable to high-quality data used in experimental studies on healthy subjects).


Behavioral assessment

Patients were assessed at the day of scanning using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) for the acute session. Since this assessment took place within days of injury, the GCS was the appropriate assessment tool (see Discussion of limitations section). At the follow-up session, the Glasgow Outcome Scale-extended (GOS-e) was performed. It is the standard assessment tool for patients who have recovered from brain injury (see Discussion of limitations section). Based on the GCS subcategories at the acute assessment, we divided the patients into two groups, those who were conscious and those who were not conscious by following a simple rule: If the patient exhibited any sign of voluntary behavior, that is, retrieved one of the following scores on either subscale, Verbal Response of 4 (Confused speech) or 5 (Oriented to time and place) or a Motor Response of 5 (Localization to noxious stimulus) or 6 (Obeys commands), the patient has recovered from unconsciousness as defined by the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (Giacino et al. 2012; Giacino and Kalmar 2006) Although it would have been interesting to include a group of patients who remained unconscious at both time points, we do not have sufficient data for these patients. However, we do believe that this group is not necessary to prove our point since it would not exhibit a dissociation between behavioral responsiveness and level of consciousness.

Only for comparison purposes, the GCS acquired on the day of the acute MRI was transformed into an “inferred GOS-E” score of 2 (if they were diagnosed as vegetative state) or a score of 3 (if they recovered from vegetative state) by using the individual GCS subscale scores. None of the patients had a higher “inferred GOS-E” score than 3 since all patients were in the intensive care unit. With the “inferred GOS-E score,” we then verified that the slope of gain in behavioral responsiveness across time are not significantly different between groups with an ANOVA using aov in R. Although a non-parametric test would have typically been the method of choice for ordinal data, we decided to implement an ANOVA since an ordinal logistic regression cannot handle (i) perfect predictions when one value of a predictor variable is associated with only one value of the response variable; (ii) small sample sizes; and (iii) small cells. All three apply to this dataset.


MRI data acquisition

For each patient, we acquired one anatomical and one functional MRI data set (among other clinical and research sequences) at each session. Anatomical data were acquired with an MPRAGE sequence (repetition time (TR) = 1900 ms, echo time = 3.52 ms, flip angle = 98). Due to the clinical and highly acute setting, we encounter some variance in the acquisition parameters for the functional data across patients and sessions (see for details).


Motion

Due to a high motion likelihood in this patient population, we carefully checked motion parameters to exclude all subjects with motion parameters higher than 2 mm translation and 2 degree of rotation within the whole range of data points based on the acquired voxel size. To do so, we displayed the three translation and three rotation parameters across the whole run and identified time-series with peaks above the threshold. We also excluded all subjects with framewise displacement above 0.5 mm using FSL_motion_outliers in the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) as suggested by Power et al. (2012).

Later in the processing pipeline, we used the three translation and three rotation parameters, their temporal difference, square, and square of the differenced values identified with FSL MCFLIRT (Jenkinson et al. 2002), as well as the aCompCor results for white matter and cerebrospinal fluid (see below) using mp_diffpow.sh as nuisance regressors to linearly regress out motion. We decided to implement a regression approach instead of censoring techniques as a preferred method to cope with motion-related artifacts (Power et al. 2014). The main reason why we did not use censoring is because this would interrupt the continuous time-series (especially problematic when investigating dynamics of connectivity), lead to unequal number of time points across subjects, and substituting this fact by means of replacing the particular time points may have broad effects on identifying variance or similar states of covariance across time (Power et al. 2015). Another major limitation is that censoring does not correct for subtler influences of motion that do not meet the arbitrary threshold of data to be censored. Instead, to define nuisance regressors, we have implemented an approach using principal component analysis on well-defined masks of white matter and cerebrospinal fluid to define nuisance regressors (referred to as anatomical CompCor or aCompCor). This approach has shown to outperform other approaches for resting-state analyses in general (Muschelli et al. 2014; Power et al. 2018) and for dynamic functional network connectivity in particular (Vergara et al. 2017). As suggested by Muschelli et al. (2014) as the optimal solution, we included the number of principal components needed to explain 50% of the variance in white matter and 50% of the variance in cerebrospinal fluid (referred to as aCompCor50). Furthermore, it has been recently shown that this strategy, when paired with stringent data selection, is as effective as censoring (Parkes et al. 2018). In addition, we have also implemented an independent component analyses (ICA) to functionally parcellate the brain which, as a side effect, extracts a signal that is to a large extent free of noise and artefacts (Power et al. 2015).


Data preprocessing

Due to the high deformation of brains and severe lesions in patients with traumatic brain injury, we scull-stripped the structural data using an optimized algorithm specifically suitable for this population as implemented in optiBET (Lutkenhoff et al. 2014). Structural images were deobliqued using 3drefit with the option -deoblique to remove oblique information from the image header and reoriented into right-to-left posterior-to-anterior inferior-to-superior (RPI) orientation using analysis of functional neuroImages (AFNI) 3dresample with the option -orient RPI. Then, the structural files were segmented into white matter, gray matter, and cerebrospinal fluid using FSL FAST. Success of segmentation results were verified visually for each image.

Our choice of preprocessing steps is roughly based on the scripts of the 1000 Functional Connectomes Project (http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org) using FSL (Jenkinson et al. 2012) and AFNI (Cox 1996). Details are outlined below.

First, resting-state fMRI data of all subjects were trimmed using fslroi discarding the first 4 time points to allow for magnetization stabilization. Second, we performed slice-time correction to account for different acquisition timing using FSL slicetimer specifying TR of data (option -r) and acquisition order (option –odd). Third, we deobliqued the slice-time corrected data to remove oblique information from the image header with AFNI 3drefit with the option -deoblique. In a next step, we reoriented the images using 3dresample with the option -orient RPI. Next, we generated the motion parameters to use as nuisance regressors in subsequent analyses for motion correction (see Motion section) using FSL mcflirt (Jenkinson et al. 2002) and mp_diffpow.sh. We then created a brain-only mask by detecting the edges of the brain and removing the skull using AFNI 3dAutomask dilating the mask outwards once (option -dilate 1). Then, we applied this mask to the reoriented data with AFNI 3dcalc using the expression -expr “a*b” to zero out everything outside of the brain. We then calculated and skull-stripped the mean image of each subject using AFNI 3dTstat option -mean. Then smoothing was performed with a 5 mm smoothing kernel using fslmaths –kernel gauss –fmean. To eliminate any global differences across subjects, we grand mean scaled the smoothed data with fslmaths –ing 10000 –odt float.


Registration

We did not register the individual subject’s images into standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space since in patients with lesions and deformations this procedure is highly prone to error. Thus, we decided to create a study-specific average template instead to register all subjects into the same space. To do so, we performed a six-step approach: (i) we randomly picked the structural image of one subject as a reference image and registered the structural images of all other subjects to the selected image using FSL FLIRT –dof 12; (ii) we calculated the average image from all the registered images including the reference image using FSL fslmaths with the –add and the –div (total number of subjects) as well as the –odt float option; (iii) We then registered the original functional images from all subjects to their structural images using FSL FLIRT –dof 6; (iv) all original structural images were registered to the average template using FSL FLIRT; (v) we then concatenated the mat files using convert_xfm; (vi) then the functional images were registered into the average template space using FSL FLIRT. A linear transformation using FLIRT was chosen since it resulted in the best outcomes and the fewest loss of subjects due to processing failure in comparison with non-linear methods such as FSL FNIRT and ANTSapplytransforms (data not shown).


Brain parcellation using independent component analysis

A graphical presentation of the processing steps and data analyses to investigate time-varying network properties is shown in. First, we performed ICA using the GIFT toolbox (http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift/index.html) to parcellate the brain into components, i.e., regions of interest as implemented in Allen et al. (2014). We have chosen this form of parcellation (also see our previous publications, e.g., Crone et al. 2015) as opposed to anatomical-based or functional-based standard atlases, because the brains we are investigating are severely damaged. The normalization procedure warping the severely damaged brain into standard MNI space is, as mentioned above, a suboptimal solution and should be avoided if possible. It is also problematic to assume that the anatomical or functional parcellation resulting from the average of young and healthy brains adequately represents the functional partitioning that can be found in a brain that has been disrupted and subject to reorganization due to traumatic brain injury. Thus, we defined the regions of interest at an individual level based on the individual functional covariance using group ICA. We ran ICA with 100 components using ICASSO randinit with 10 runs, the Infomax algorithm, and a PCA Expectation Maximization with stacked data sets, a floating point precision, 1000 numbers of iterations, and two reduction steps. The data have been intensity normalized and scaled to percent signal change. Then, the components were visually inspected to exclude all components of noise and artifacts resulting in 43 components/regions of interest (see for all components included).


Assessing time-varying network properties using a sliding time window approach

Since brain function is not stationary and recent work has found growing evidence for a significant association between brain dynamics and the state of consciousness, we used time-varying network properties as our brain measure of interest (please see Discussion section for a thorough debate on brain dynamics). For reasons of comparability and because there is yet no consensus on which is the best approach to investigate temporal dynamics (Preti et al. 2017; Lurie et al. 2019), we implemented the same sliding-window approach as described in Barttfeld et al. (2015) and in Allen et al. (2014) using the dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC) toolbox integrated in GIFT (http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift/index.html). We specified all 43 selected components to be included in further analyses and sorted these regions of interest according to the network they belong to, based on a similar organization scheme as presented in Allen et al. (2014). As described in the Motion section above, we used the six motion parameters, their temporal difference, square, and square of the differenced values, as well as the outliers as covariates to be regressed out from each time course. In addition, we also used age as a covariate. Using a sliding window approach, covariance matrices were computed from windowed segments of the time-course of the regions of interest as computed in the previous step. We used a tapered window with a size of 20 TRs (Leonardi and Van De Ville 2015) with a Gaussian (σ = 3 TRs) and a slide in steps on 1 TR (number of repetition = 10) resulting in 185 windows. Previous studies have shown that windows between 30 and 60 s are best suited to capture fluctuations in resting-state data and that different window lengths (when chosen within this limit) do not result in different findings (Preti et al. 2017). To promote sparsity and address the problem of a limited window size (Xu and Lindquist 2015), we estimated covariance from the regularized precision matrix placing a penalty on the L1 norm with 10 numbers of repetition. We despiked and detrended (option 3) the data using a high-frequency cutoff at 0.15 Hz. In addition, we specified the TR for each data set separately.


Network metrics

We focused on two network metrics, node strength and clustering coefficient (see Discussion section for the rationale of choice). Node strength is a measure of centrality at the local level quantifying the influence, and thus, the capability for information integration of every node within the network. Clustering coefficient is a higher order term measuring the degree to which nodes and their nearest neighbors tend to cluster together revealing therefore the amount of segregation. To calculate each metric, we first normalized the correlation matrix (r) using the algorithm, weight_conversion (W, “normalize”), provided by the Brain Connectivity Toolbox (Rubinov and Sporns 2010). We calculated node strength (strengths_und_sign.m) and clustering coefficient (clustering_coef_wu_sign.m) with the Brain Connectivity Toolbox (Rubinov and Sporns 2010) for the whole brain as well as for our four specific regions within the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuit, i.e., medial frontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, thalamus, and globus pallidus. For the frontal regions of interest, we took the mean of all included components representing medial frontal areas. For the posterior cingulate cortex, thalamus, and the globus pallidus, we identified the component corresponding the most with our region of interest. For further analyses, we focused on the metrics for the positive correlations only, since the interpretation of positive correlations is straightforward in contrast to negative correlations. Instead of investigating differences between brain states, we used the summary statistic variability for the assessed metrics because previous work suggests that identification of states is less reliable and may be sensitive to features of data acquisition that vary between subjects (Choe et al. 2017). Because of the severe injury in patients’ brains, we expect especially in our cohort to find more variation between subjects than between groups.


Testing patterns in the data

In this study, we implemented different approaches to test the pattern of data: (i) non-parametric frequentist testing, (ii) permutation frequentist testing, (iii) effect sizes, and (iv) Bayesian testing. Because of the low number of subjects per cell, non-normal data, and unequal variances, we used non-parametric tests in JASP (JASP Team (2019); Version 0.11. 1), i.e., the Mann–Whitney or the Welch test for independent data and the Wilcoxon for paired data. To address the above mentioned issues (i.e. especially the small sample size), we also verified our results with permutation t-tests in R (paired.perm.test in Broman library and oneway_test in Coin library). All P-values were corrected for multiple comparisons for the different metrics and regions using false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995) to increase power due to our small sample size. Please note that we did not correct for the multiple tests between cells because we are not interpreting the results of each test but the overall pattern. Given the relatively small sample size of the analyzed cohort, we also included a parallel effect size analysis in JASP in order to estimate the size of all significant effects. Finally, to be able to confirm our pattern (rejection of the null hypothesis for the acute session and for the unconscious–conscious group as well as confirmation of the null hypothesis for the follow-up session and the conscious–conscious group), we additionally used Bayesian statistics in JASP for all cases that demonstrate the pattern of interest. Bayesian analysis allows to evaluate which of the hypotheses (alternative or null) are more likely given the data, and thus, provides evidence for or against a specific hypothesis. We ran Bayesian independent (Mann–Whitney) and paired t-tests (since there is no Bayesian non-parametric option for paired data in JASP) for each comparison, respectively, calculating the Bayes factor to quantify evidence either for the alternative hypothesis (for comparisons between groups at the acute session and within groups for the unconscious–conscious group) or for the null hypothesis (for comparisons between groups at the follow-up session and within groups for the unconscious–conscious group). We used the default prior Cauchy with a scale of 0.707 (Wagenmakers et al. 2018). Incorporating the prior knowledge resulting from the frequentist testing, we specified the direction of the test for all comparisons. We also applied a robustness analysis in cases in which it was applicable (paired data) to quantify the evidential impact of the width of r for the Cauchy prior distribution (Wagenmakers et al. 2018).


Low-level behavioral responsiveness versus high-level behavioral responsiveness

To further assess the relationship between brain dynamics and behavioral responsiveness, we also compare brain dynamics between two groups of patients which, despite including both conscious patients, demonstrate very different levels of behavioral responsiveness. Based on a previously introduced taxonomy (Bruno et al. 2011), we subcategorize the conscious patients (for the acute session only) by distinguishing those who exhibit “high-level behavioral responses (i.e. command following, intelligible verbalizations or non-functional communication),” referred to as minimally conscious state “plus” (MCS+), from those who exhibit “low-level behavioral responses (i.e. visual pursuit, localization of noxious stimulation or contingent behavior such as appropriate smiling or crying to emotional stimuli),” referred to as MCS “minus” (MCS−). We then separated the patients into two groups including only MCS+ in the high-level behavioral responsiveness group and the others in the low-level responsiveness group. If brain dynamics are indeed a reflection of the state of consciousness and not of behavioral responsiveness (and implied cognitive functioning), despite the very different behavioral profile of the two patient groups, they ought not to differ significantly in their brain dynamics. The same analyses were applied as described in the paragraph above.


Stationary network metrics

Finally, we also compare the network dynamics results obtained with the sliding-window approach described above to the results obtained from a more conventional “stationary” approach—i.e. an approach in which each network metric is calculated over the full length of the time-series (as opposed to being calculated over each of the 185 windows obtained from each time-series). Consequently, in the stationary approach—which can be thought of as a windowed approach with only one window encompassing the full time-series—the dependent variable is the value of each network metric itself rather than the variance of network metrics across 185 windows. All other aspects of the analysis (e.g. calculation of network metrics and statistical comparisons) were carried out as in the dynamics analysis described above.


Results


Behavioral assessment

According to the behavioral assessment using the GCS (Teasdale and Jennett 1974) and the GOS-E (Jennett et al. 1981) at the acute and follow-up session, respectively, we divided the patients into the unconscious–conscious group (N = 10) and the conscious–conscious group (N = 8). The ANOVA testing the effects on general behavioral responsiveness as measured by the total score revealed a significant effect for group (F = 4.398, P = 0.044), for session (F = 69.123, P < 0.001), and no interaction effect (F = 0.629, P = 0.434). These findings confirm the dissociation of the state of consciousness and the level of behavioral responsiveness.


Dynamic functional connectivity

As shown in and, the pattern of differences we observed across groups and time points conforms exactly to the expected “consciousness pattern” at the whole brain level, for medial frontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and globus pallidus, but not for thalamus.

At the whole brain level, we observe a trending difference between groups at the acute session (P = 0.064 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.81 for the node strength) but not at the follow-up session (P = 0.997 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.997 for the node strength). Between sessions, we found a significant difference in the unconscious–conscious group (P = 0.015 for the node strength, and a trend, P = 0.059, for the clustering coefficient) but not for the conscious–conscious group (P = 0.999 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.999 for the node strength).

The same pattern was observed for the medial frontal cortex. We see a significant difference between groups at the acute session (P = 0.036 for the clustering coefficient and a trend, P = 0.052 for the node strength) but not at the follow-up session (P = 0.997 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.997 for the node strength). Between sessions, we found a significant difference in the unconscious–conscious group (P = 0.032 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.015 for the node strength) but not for the conscious–conscious group (P = 0.999 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.999 for the node strength).

The posterior cingulate cortex also showed significant differences between groups at the acute session (P = 0.033 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.009 for the node strength) but none at the follow-up session (P = 0.997 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.997 for the node strength). We also found a significant difference between sessions in the unconscious–conscious group (P = 0.032 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.034 for the node strength) but no differences between sessions for the conscious-conscious group (P = 0.999 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.999 for the node strength).

In the globus pallidus, we found a significant difference between groups at the acute session (P = 0.015 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.033 for the node strength) but not at the follow-up session (P = 0.997 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.997 for the node strength). Between sessions, we found a significant difference in the unconscious–conscious group (P = 0.032 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.032 for the node strength) but not for the conscious–conscious group (P = 0.999 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.999 for the node strength).

Interestingly, the thalamus did not show the “consciousness pattern”. There was no significant difference between groups neither at the acute session (a trend, P = 0.064, for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.257 for the node strength) nor at the follow-up session (P = 0.997 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.997 for the node strength). Between sessions, there was also no significant difference in the unconscious–conscious group (P = 0.138 for the clustering coefficient and a trend, P = 0.059 for the node strength) nor in the conscious–conscious group (P = 0.999 for the clustering coefficient and P = 0.999 for the node strength). All P-values reported above are FDR corrected.

As expected, the permutation t-tests confirm the non-parametric findings.

The effect size analysis also confirms the pattern found in the frequentist analyses with all significant comparisons between groups and sessions demonstrating a high effect with at least 0.625 and at least 0.425 for all trending comparisons.

The Bayesian analysis also supports the general pattern. In most cases in which the alternative hypothesis (H1) is favored, we find moderate (in some cases even strong) evidence demonstrating that the alternative hypothesis is at least 3× or more likely than the null hypothesis (H0). The robustness analysis confirms moderate evidence across different widths r. In cases in which the null hypothesis (H0) is favored, evidence is between anecdotal and moderate meaning that the null hypothesis is at least around 2× more likely. The robustness analysis demonstrates that as the width r increases, the Bayes factor increases as well ranging between anecdotal and moderate.


Low-level behavioral responsiveness versus high-level behavioral responsiveness

Consistent with the above reported results, when we compared brain dynamics for patients differing only in their level of behavioral responsiveness (i.e. high-level versus low-level), we failed to observe any significant difference between groups or between sessions. –E shows the results from the non-parametric testing and the results from the permutation t-tests.


Stationary functional connectivity

Intriguingly, when testing for differences in metrics for stationary functional connectivity in contrast to dynamic functional connectivity, we also could not detect any differences between groups at either session nor between sessions in either group (see –E for results from the non-parametric t-tests and for the results from the permutation t-tests).

The results for the effect size confirm the findings of the frequentist analyses failing to reveal the pattern of interest.


Discussion

This study was designed to address the question of whether brain dynamics are best interpreted as neuronal correlates of the state of consciousness (as so far only assumed in previous studies) or whether they rather reflect the level of behavioral responsiveness (and implied cognitive functioning). For example, a recent study in a large sample of patients and anesthetized healthy volunteers has identified a complex dynamic pattern of coordinated and anti-coordinated fMRI signals that characterizes conscious subjects in contrast to unconscious subjects (Demertzi et al. 2019). However, the reported differences in the state of consciousness are confounded by a simultaneous improvement of behavioral responsiveness as it is the case in most studies in this field. Despite including a clever comparison across two patient groups with different states of consciousness (as revealed by functional MRI) but matching assessment of behavioral responsiveness (as revealed by bedside clinical assessment), the comparison is still limited by the same confounding factor. Although the two patient groups appear behaviorally matched, the fact that patients in one group could voluntarily engage in a complex mental activity (e.g. “imagine playing tennis”) indicates a state of cognitive-motor dissociation (Demertzi et al. 2019). Given the high cognitive demand of mental imagery even for healthy subjects, patients successfully performing such a task must exhibit significant residual cognitive functioning, e.g., sufficient working memory, language comprehension, and attention span (Pearson et al. 2015). Consequently, the higher probability of a complex dynamic pattern in patients with cognitive-motor dissociation can still be attributed to differences in residual cognitive functioning as opposed to differences in the state of consciousness.

The present study is the first to specifically address this conflation by dissociating differences in the state of consciousness from differences in behavioral responsiveness. Even though a precise dissociation is not possible due to the non-linear properties of recovery in cognitive function (please see the Limitation section for a detailed discussion of this problem), our results provide very strong evidence supporting previous claims that brain dynamics are mainly associated with the state of consciousness as opposed to the level of behavioral responsiveness (and implied residual cognitive functioning). The results match exactly the four-pronged pattern we expected to observe if indeed the state of consciousness is the driving force of time-varying network properties (compare to). While we found significant differences, both within and between patient groups, when there was a qualitative change in state of consciousness, we could not detect any such difference when there was a quantitative change in the level of behavioral responsiveness but not in consciousness. This pattern was observed at the overall whole-brain level as well as in key sub-regions selected on the basis of prior literature (Schiff 2010) and confirmed by a set of multiple analysis strategies including non-parametric and permutation frequentist statistics as well as Bayesian statistics. In contrast, none of the analyses revealed the “general behavioral responsiveness” pattern. To further confirm the pivotal role of the state of consciousness in the observed pattern (in contrast to behavioral responsiveness), we divided the patients in two groups based on their level of behavioral responsiveness rather than the state of consciousness. Consistent with the above results, the groups do not differ in their dynamic network metrics despite differences in behavioral responsiveness which provides further evidence that brain dynamics best reflect the state of consciousness in contrast to the level of behavioral responsiveness.

Interestingly, the thalamus was the only tested region that did not follow this pattern. These results are especially intriguing considering previous findings suggesting a reduced role of the thalamus in recovery of the state of consciousness (Crone et al. 2017). However, it is possible that a more subtle effect might be observable with a larger sample, even though the effect size analysis confirms that changes in time-varying network properties are related to changes in the state of consciousness in all regions that show significant results.

The present results also touch upon the ongoing debate whether frontal or posterior regions are the “hot spot” of consciousness (Boly et al. 2017; Dienes et al. 2017). While the present design was not designed to test the sufficiency of either brain regions for the emergence of consciousness, our findings do indicate that both seem to play a critical role for dynamic network organization underlying the state of consciousness. We would also like to emphasize in this context that the present study focuses on brain function underlying the state of consciousness as opposed to conscious processing of stimuli and subjective conscious experience (Dehaene and Changeux 2011) since these two concepts should be clearly distinguished regarding the ongoing debate.

In addition, we also report that a stationary representation of functional connectivity properties, in contrast to its dynamic representation, does not sufficiently reflect the state of consciousness. In fact, when adopting a stationary, time-invariant approach to estimating properties of neural functional connectivity, we could not detect any significant difference across groups and between sessions. While this finding is interesting, and tackles an important methodological question, a general investigation of brain dynamics goes beyond the scope of this study and specific research is needed focusing on adequate methodological approaches to provide deeper insight into this issue.

Consistent with prior studies, we also find that the variability in the variance of functional connectivity properties from subject to subject is lowest in the group of unconscious patients and highest for the group of patients that are conscious.

Finally, interpretation of these findings should be mindful of a number of limitations. First, brain dynamics in fMRI resting state have been a subject of debate regarding their neuronal origin, methodological implementation, and reliability (Abrol et al. 2017; Lehmann et al. 2017; Liegeois et al. 2017; Preti et al. 2017; Kucyi et al. 2018; Laumann et al. 2018; Miller et al. 2018; Thompson 2018; Lurie et al. 2019). Although there is a need for more thorough investigations in the future (Preti et al. 2017; Lurie et al. 2019), a large body of work has already demonstrated a neurophysiological basis of brain dynamics in fMRI data (de Pasquale et al. 2010; Tagliazucchi et al. 2012; Thompson et al. 2013) as well as its reproducibility (Abrol et al. 2017; Choe et al. 2017; Vidaurre et al. 2018). Moreover, most criticism regarding whether brain dynamics are biological meaningful is directed towards their role as a correlate of cognitive processing itself and content of cognition (Laumann et al. 2018, see also Discussion in Lurie et al. 2019). With respect to the state of arousal and consciousness, there seems to be much more consensus on the fact that brain dynamics may indeed be reflective of these fundamental state changes. Even though part of this complex activity remains during total loss of consciousness (Keilholz et al. 2013), significant differences have been demonstrated between different states (Chang et al. 2013; Hutchison et al. 2013, Amico et al. 2014; Hall et al. 2014; Tagliazucchi et al. 2014; Tagliazucchi and Laufs 2014; Barttfeld et al. 2015; Hudetz et al. 2015; Laumann et al. 2018; Demertzi et al. 2019).

Second, one should be mindful of the fact that recovery of consciousness and responsiveness is not a linear process and that the linear relationship between these two quite distant time points as indicated by the straight lines in, although necessary for this approach, is most certainly an oversimplification; and although the quantitative measure of the gain of behavioral responsiveness did not significantly differ between groups, there might be qualitative differences which we could not observe. Differences in quality, as demonstrated by the ongoing debate concerning accurate diagnoses in patients with disorders of consciousness (e.g. Childs et al. 1993; Andrews et al. 1996; Owen et al. 2006; Schnakers et al. 2009), are difficult to assess and compare. The findings of this study rely on the assumption that the absolute changes in the level of responsiveness are comparable, and thus, follow a linear trend at either end of the scale. However, the reality is probably a much more complex, non-linear development, especially regarding the recovery of cognitive function. We know little about the trajectory of changes in cognitive function during recovery from severe brain injury. Most likely, changes in cognitive function at the lower end of the scale are of critical importance and not directly comparable to changes at the higher end of the scale in a quantitative sense. Thus, these non-linear changes are still an issue in the present study and may confound our results. In this sense, the conclusions of this study should be considered with a grain of salt and in the context of the limitations intrinsic to the experimental study dissociating consciousness from other aspects of behavioral responsiveness in patients who do not have the ability to express themselves (Monti and Owen 2010).

Third, to verify the four-pronged pattern we expected to observe if the state of consciousness is the driving force of time-varying network properties, we implemented additional Bayesian hypothesis testing which allows to specifically quantify evidence in favor of either hypothesis in contrast to frequentist statistics which are exclusively designed to quantify evidence against a pre-specified null hypothesis that is sought to be rejected. However, when testing how likely the null hypothesis is given the data, the Bayes factor is quite low in most cases and reaches only anecdotal to moderate evidence depending on the width of the prior. To deal with the very small numbers of subjects per cell, we have additionally implemented permutation testing for the frequentist statistics. However, JASP does not provide an equivalent Bayesian approach. A very small Bayes factor (close to 1) may suggest a not sufficient amount of data for the analyses (Dienes 2014). This may also play into account explaining the weak evidence of the Bayesian approach. Altogether though, the Bayesian analyses confirms the general pattern that all our analyses reveal supporting the conclusion that time-varying network properties depend rather on the state of consciousness than on the general level of responsiveness.

Fourth, severe brain injury patients are often prone to high rates of in-scanner motion and wide-spread lesions. Given the known deleterious effects of motion and distortions on network metrics, we have excluded patients with higher motion and severe lesions. While the above strategy resulted in loss of a large part of our original sample, it does ensure that the data are of high quality in this patient population (similar to what is standard in experimental studies using high-quality healthy-subject data). Nevertheless, in-scanner motion is a critical issue for studies investigating functional connectivity (Power et al. 2012; Satterthwaite et al. 2012; Van Dijk et al. 2012) including brain dynamics (Laumann et al. 2018). And although one study has shown that motion does not seem to influence brain dynamics to a critical amount (Abrol et al. 2017), it is important to emphasize that we followed the most recent recommendations for a successful minimization of motion effects using specific data preprocessing steps (Power et al. 2018) (for more detailed information see Motion section).

Fifth, since complexity and the specific structure of the network are of significant importance for theories of consciousness (Baars 1988; Dehaene and Changeux 2011; Lau and Rosenthal 2011; Tononi et al. 2016), we investigated the dynamics of specific network properties that describe qualitative aspects of brain interaction in a quantitative way. Similar to time-varying properties, we believe that the fundamental state of a person such as whether he is conscious of his environment or not may be directly reflected by changes in the structure of the network, in contrast to the more subtle changes that occur at different levels of cognition and motor responses. We focused on only two network metrics, node strength and clustering coefficient for the following reasons: considering the small sample size and the sheer vast number of properties one can assess, we decided to assess a limited number of metrics as opposed to assessing all potential measures and then selecting the best post hoc or enforcing a large multiple-comparison correction. We settled on these two measures because they are among the most common metrics implemented in brain research and have been used in previous research investigating temporal dynamics (Yu et al. 2015) while also being appropriate measures to reflect upon the network’s ability to segregate and integrate information at the local level. Of course, other metrics have also been employed in the context of the study of consciousness [e.g. normalized characteristic path length (Monti et al. 2013) and modularity (Crone et al. 2014)]. However, since we were especially interested in the network properties of specific nodes in the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuit, global measures such as modularity which cannot be calculated locally could not be applied.

Sixth, due to the acute clinical setting in the intensive care unit, subsets of our data were acquired with different MRI parameters. However, it has been shown that correlation estimates are very stable across spatial resolution (i.e. voxel size), temporal resolution (i.e. TR), and duration of data acquisition (exceeding 5 min) (Van Dijk et al. 2010). Furthermore, analyses also confirm that there are no significant differences in the TR between groups and sessions (P ≥ 0.5 for all comparisons).

Seventh, because we had a specific prediction as to the pattern we ought to observe if brain dynamics are a reflection of one’s state of consciousness, we implemented our hypothesis testing as the conjunction of four independent tests. Of course, other approaches could have been applied. Specifically, a mixed-design ANOVA could have been an appropriate approach for a between-groups design with repeated measures. However, this approach would not necessarily be able to test the patterns of interest because in case of a non-significant interaction testing simple effects would not be justified. Yet, the simple effects are required to test the expected pattern. Especially given the lower degrees of freedom in an ANOVA design and the small sample size, a significant interaction is not necessarily expected. Thus, a joined test of between- and within-subjects t-test was deemed the appropriate choice for this specific analysis.

Eighth, in the context of severe brain injury behavioral scales such as the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (Giacino and Kalmar 2006; Giacino et al. 2012) have been shown to be more sensitive to a patient’s state of consciousness (Schnakers et al. 2006) as compared to the GCS. However, due to the acute setting, the GCS is generally considered more appropriate. In the follow-up session, the vast majority of the patients had recovered to a level of behavior exceeding the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised’s and GCS’ ceiling scores, thus, making either scale not suitable for most patients. In consequence, we were not able to test differences for the distinctive subscales which would have provided more information regarding specific aspects of behavioral responsiveness.

In conclusion, we believe that it is important to reinforce a more hypothesis-driven and experimental approach in research on the state of consciousness. In addition to the common correlative and exploratory studies in this field, such an approach enables a much more justified interpretation of findings, and thus, provides further insight into the neuronal correlates of impaired consciousness. Following this approach, this is the first study attempting to provide experimental data supporting the wide-spread assumption that brain dynamics are sensitive to states of consciousness in patients after severe brain injury, and therefore, may be a promising target for future studies to identify a surrogate biomarker of consciousness based on task-free neuroimaging (Monti and Lutkenhoff 2016).


High-voltage, diffuse delta rhythms coincide with wakeful consciousness and complexity in Angelman syndrome

Joel Frohlich, Lynne M Bird, John Dell’Italia, Micah A Johnson, Joerg F Hipp, Martin M Monti — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7293820, CC BY 4.0.

Abundant evidence from slow wave sleep, anesthesia, coma, and epileptic seizures links high-voltage, slow electroencephalogram (EEG) activity to loss of consciousness. This well-established correlation is challenged by the observation that children with Angelman syndrome (AS), while fully awake and displaying volitional behavior, display a hypersynchronous delta (1–4 Hz) frequency EEG phenotype typical of unconsciousness. Because the trough of the delta oscillation is associated with down-states in which cortical neurons are silenced, the presence of volitional behavior and wakefulness in AS amidst diffuse delta rhythms presents a paradox. Moreover, high-voltage, slow EEG activity is generally assumed to lack complexity, yet many theories view functional brain complexity as necessary for consciousness. Here, we use abnormal cortical dynamics in AS to assess whether EEG complexity may scale with the relative level of consciousness despite a background of hypersynchronous delta activity. As characterized by multiscale metrics, EEGs from 35 children with AS feature significantly greater complexity during wakefulness compared with sleep, even when comparing the most pathological segments of wakeful EEG to the segments of sleep EEG least likely to contain conscious mentation and when factoring out delta power differences across states. These findings (i) warn against reverse inferring an absence of consciousness solely on the basis of high-amplitude EEG delta oscillations, (ii) corroborate rare observations of preserved consciousness under hypersynchronization in other conditions, (iii) identify biomarkers of consciousness that have been validated under conditions of abnormal cortical dynamics, and (iv) lend credence to theories linking consciousness with complexity.

Keywords: disorders of consciousness, neurology, sleep and dreaming, states of consciousness, theories and models


Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) offers a window into neural activity during sleep and wakefulness, generally revealing low-voltage, fast activity during wakefulness and high-voltage, slow activity during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (Benington et al. 1994; Dijk 1995; Cajochen et al. 1999; Steriade 2000). The former is typically viewed as informationally rich interactions, whereas the latter is typically viewed as informationally poor synchronization, wherein the number of possible activity states is greatly diminished (Baars et al. 2013). Similarly to NREM sleep, loss of consciousness in other states also coincides with a high-voltage EEG rhythm (Alkire et al. 2008; Chennu et al. 2014; Sitt et al. 2014) exhibiting lower signal complexity (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Casali et al. 2013; Sarasso et al. 2015; Hudetz et al. 2016; Schartner et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018). For instance, in a state of anesthesia, loss of consciousness coincides with a widespread increase in EEG power at low frequencies (Murphy et al. 2011; Supp et al. 2011; Lewis et al. 2012; Purdon et al. 2013), marking a decrease in corticocortical interactions (Mélanie Boly et al. 2012; Monti et al. 2013). Absence seizures and temporal lobe seizures that impair consciousness are also associated with significant increases in slow waves (Holmes et al. 1987; Englot et al. 2010). Similar findings have been reported for other modes of loss of consciousness including advanced states of encephalopathy and coma (Kaplan 2004; Sutter and Kaplan 2012), sudden acceleration (Squires et al. 1964; Wilson et al. 2005), basilar artery migraine (Muellbacher and Mamoli 1994), and convulsive syncope (Varrasi et al. 2011).

In apparent contradiction to the above data, children with Angelman syndrome (AS) display the rich spectrum of purposeful behavior that implies conscious awareness (as seen here) (Andersen et al. 2001; Williams 2005; What does Angelman Syndrome look like? 2016) while exhibiting the high-voltage, slow EEG phenotype typical of states of reduced consciousness (Vendrame et al. 2012; Sidorov et al. 2017; den Bakker et al. 2018; Frohlich et al. 2019a; external data in are from Terzano et al., 2001; Goldberger et al., 2000; Shoeb, 2009). Beyond challenging the general correlation between unconsciousness and cortical hypersynchronization, it may also be argued that the AS EEG phenotype is an enigma from a mechanistic standpoint. While OFF-periods of cortical silence generally occur at the trough of each delta cycle in other contexts (Destexhe et al. 2007; Wilson 2008), a different mechanism may occur in AS since it is unclear how consciousness—being dependent on the cerebral cortex (Koch et al. 2016)—would persist with cortical neurons offline. Furthermore, if one assumes that neural hypersynchronization is antagonistic to neural complexity (Tononi and Edelman 1998), the AS EEG phenotype may challenge theories of consciousness such as integrated information theory (IIT) that conceptually tie consciousness to functional brain complexity (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016). Specifically, in the case of IIT, the differentiation or diversity of neural activity is a key requirement for consciousness (Oizumi et al. 2014). In apparent contradiction to this framework, the awake state AS EEG appears hypersynchronized, with little differentiation visible at the level of the scalp (Vendrame et al. 2012; Sidorov et al. 2017; den Bakker et al. 2018; Frohlich et al. 2019a). In translational work, consciousness is also linked to neural complexity by the perturbational complexity index, a successful method of inferring consciousness based on the brain’s electrophysiological “echo” following a magnetic pulse (Casali et al. 2013; Comolatti et al. 2019). Though an inverse relationship between slow, hypersynchronous EEG activity and complexity is intuitive, it remains uncertain whether this is universally the case.

Although the AS EEG phenotype has long been described in clinical reports (Boyd et al. 1988), we are the first to characterize the degree to which the awake EEG in children with AS can support complex dynamics and, moreover, that these dynamics are demonstrably lowered as consciousness decreases during sleep. AS is caused by dysfunction of the gene UBE3A (Kishino et al. 1997; Buiting et al. 2016). Its clinical phenotype encompasses global developmental delay, intellectual disability, microcephaly, epilepsy, and sleep difficulties (Thibert et al. 2013; Bird 2014; Buiting et al. 2016). Developmental abilities in AS commonly plateau at an age equivalence of less than 30 months (Peters et al. 2004; Gentile et al. 2010) and the majority of individuals with AS lack functional speech (Williams 1995; Gentile et al. 2010); thus, this population presents an unusually clear dissociation between consciousness and other cognitive processes (e.g. language) which often confound efforts to associate a particular quantity with consciousness (Montemayor et al. 2019). Puzzlingly, awake state EEG recordings from children with AS display diffuse, slow rhythmic oscillations at delta frequencies (Sidorov et al., 2017; Frohlich et al. 2019a) reminiscent of those seen in slow wave sleep and other states of unconsciousness. In fact, spectral power at the delta peak frequency (2.8 Hz) in awake children with AS exceeds that observed in typically developing (TD) children by > 1000% (Frohlich et al. 2019a). At face value, either the inverse association between EEG delta power and consciousness does not generalize to the hypersynchronized, but wakeful and conscious, brain in AS, or amidst the pathologically high-voltage slow rhythm observed in awake children with AS, sufficiently complex interactions nonetheless arise and persist over time.

To address this puzzle, we examined whether brain dynamics observed in children with AS during periods of wakefulness were more complex than those observed during periods of sleep despite the global presence of large delta oscillations in both states. As described below, contrary to common readings of EEG and despite diffuse delta oscillations, the awake EEG of children with AS supports significantly greater signal complexity than the asleep AS EEG. This finding persisted even after contrasting periods of wakefulness showing the most pathological EEG signature to the periods of sleep least likely to coincide with any dream experience (Siclari et al. 2013), and, moreover, after accounting for differences in delta power between states.


Materials and Methods


Data acquisition

AS is a rare disorder affecting approximately 1 in 10 000–24 000 individuals (Petersen et al. 1995; Mertz et al. 2013). Given the challenge of obtaining sufficient data from a rare condition, we sought to maximize our sample size through an NIH funded AS Natural History Study [NCT00296764] (i.e. we did not calculate an optimal sample size a priori). Spontaneous EEG recordings from children with AS were collected from two sites (Boston Children’s Hospital and Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego) through the natural history study. Participants were encouraged to sleep during part of the EEG acquisition; however, due to severe sleep disturbances in AS (Thibert et al. 2013), not all children were able to fall asleep. EEG recordings were acquired in a clinical setting using an international 10 − 20 EEG montage (19 channels). Most participants were on central nervous system medications treating seizures or other symptoms (see for a complete list of medications and supplements). All EEG data were acquired at one of three native sampling rates: 250 Hz, 256 Hz, or 512 Hz. Annotations denoting sleep, drowsiness, and behavioral state were provided based on behavioral criteria by the EEG technician during data acquisition. Sections of data containing drowsiness were excluded from analysis. Due to the delayed developmental abilities of many children with AS, the EEG acquisition protocol did not control for eye condition (e.g. eyes open or eyes closed) during wakefulness. Some participants gave longitudinal data across multiple visits. Sleep quality data were collected by asking parents how many nights per week their child slept through the night.

From a total of 161 EEG recordings from 99 participants, we identified 35 children with AS whose EEG (48 recordings) contained sections of both sleep and wakefulness. Only participants in the 1–18 years age range were considered, as this is the age range in which the AS delta EEG phenotype has been quantitatively described (Frohlich et al. 2019a). Participant details are given in. Only one EEG recording was analyzed per participant according to criteria that included age and amount of usable data. In cases where participants gave data at multiple visits, we analyzed EEG from the visit that yielded the greatest number of valid frequency transform windows at the lowest frequency analyzed (1 Hz) in data sections from the targeted comparison. Ties were broken using the youngest visit, as delta power is known to attenuate with age in AS (Frohlich et al. 2019a).


Preprocessing

Data were imported to MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., Torrance, CA, USA) for processing and analysis. We bandpass filtered all recordings 0.5–45 Hz using finite impulse response filtering. Noisy channels and sections of data containing gross artifacts were manually marked to be avoided for purposes of calculating spectral power and signal complexity measures. We also omitted sections of data recorded while participants were exposed to light flash stimuli intended to trigger epileptiform activity. Stereotyped physiological and technical artifacts were removed with independent components analysis using the FastICA algorithm (Hyvarinen 1999; Jung et al. 2000). Bad channels were spatially interpolated using a spline interpolation. A prior publication describes the full details of EEG acquisition and preprocessing (Frohlich et al. 2019a).


Wavelet transform

We computed EEG spectral power using a Morlet wavelet transform. We chose a spectral band-width of 1/2 octave (corresponding to f/σf ∼ 8.7; σf, spectral SD) and spaced the center frequencies logarithmically (base 2) with exponents ranging from 0 (1 Hz) to 5 (32 Hz) (inclusive) in 1/8 octave increments, yielding a total of 41 frequency bins. We then computed power in successive 3/4-overlapping temporal windows of 1 s duration. Time-frequency representations were discarded at time points where the convolution kernel overlapped with sections marked as artifact by more than 20% (see preprocessing). Finally, we averaged the time-frequency representation. To plot spectral power, we first averaged across channels, then log-transformed power before averaging across participants. For statistical comparisons between conditions, we log-transformed power at each point in channel-frequency space (see Statistical Analysis below).


Signal complexity

Many different quantitative measures of EEG complexity exist, including those that capture the complexity of individual channels (e.g. signal entropy) (Costa et al. 2002; Ibáñez-Molina et al. 2015) and those that account for interactions between channels (e.g. phi in the context of IIT, or causal density in the context of Granger causality; Seth et al. 2011; Toker and Sommer 2019). While the latter category may be more desirable from a theoretical viewpoint, their validity often rests on model assumptions that are difficult to satisfy (e.g. Gaussian or stationary data) (Seth et al. 2015; Toker and Sommer 2019). Thus, we opted for the former category and measured EEG signal complexity using two methods, modified multiscale entropy (mMSE) (Costa et al. 2002; Xie et al. 2008) and generalized Lempel-Ziv (gMLZ) (Lempel and Ziv 1976; Ibáñez-Molina et al. 2015; Yeh and Shi 2018) complexity. mMSE compliments gMLZ because multiscale entropy, unlike Lempel-Ziv complexity, does not yield large values for white noise (Costa et al. 2002). Specifically, mMSE captures the balance between periodicity and randomness in the signal, computed as modified sample entropy (mSampEn) (Xie et al. 2008) across 20 timescales using a coarse graining procedure that excludes high frequencies at each step (Costa et al. 2002). gMLZ captures the incompressibility or number of unique substrings in the signal (Lempel and Ziv 1976) and is also computed across 20 timescales (Ibáñez-Molina et al. 2015) using two median filters with different smoothing windows to exclude both low and high frequencies at each step (Yeh and Shi 2018). See for the center frequencies, smoothing window sizes, and bandwidths at each gMLZ timescale.

Because the sampling rate influences multiscale analyses, all EEG signals were downsampled to 200 Hz without filtering prior to computing mMSE and gMLZ. Data sections containing artifacts, drowsiness, or light flashes were excised prior to computing mMSE and gMLZ. In the full comparison, mMSE and gMLZ were computed in nonoverlapping segments; in the targeted comparison, we applied 50% overlap between data segments to give better coverage of shorter data. Further details of how mMSE and gMLZ were computed can be found in the.


Comparison of sleep versus wakefulness

Our comparison of data from sleep and wakefulness is informed by the finding that most awakenings from NREM sleep are accompanied by reports of dreams (Stickgold et al. 2001) and are thus “contaminated” by consciousness. In addition to the variance in level of consciousness encountered in sleep, there is large variance in delta amplitude encountered during wakefulness in AS children (Sidorov et al. 2017). For these two reasons, we performed two comparisons of EEG data: (i) a full comparison using all usable data from both the awake and the asleep state and (ii) a targeted comparison using sections of sleep EEG that are unlikely to coincide with conscious experience (as judged by parietal EEG activity) paired with sections of awake EEG that are especially abnormal as judged by their delta power. For a detailed explanation of how data sections were chosen for the targeted comparison, see.


Statistical analysis

Both mMSE and gMLZ are defined such that regularities (e.g. delta oscillations) in the signal diminish complexity. For this reason, we covaried for delta (1–4 Hz integrated) power using simple linear regression models (separate model for each channel, timescale, and complexity measure). We report results of the targeted comparison both with and without covarying for delta power. To infer whether changes in signal complexity between sleep and wakefulness were mediated by changes in delta power, we used a nonparametric (2 × 104 bootstraps) path analytic framework for mediation analysis (Montoya and Hayes 2017).

To account for a large number of comparisons across channels and timescales or frequencies, we used permutation cluster statistics to test for differences between sleep and wakefulness in both complexity and spectral power (Maris and Oostenveld 2007; Nichols and Holmes 2002). We first performed t-tests at each channel and timescale/frequency and then thresholded t-statistics using P = 0.01 before clustering in channel-timescale space (complexity) or channel-frequency space (spectral power). For each cluster, we then derived two-tailed statistical significance nonparametrically by permuting the condition labels 104 times and comparing the size of the original cluster to the empirical distribution of cluster sizes. This approach is unbiased with respect to directionality, frequency/timescale, and electrode location. In total, we performed eight separate tests: power and complexity were examined in both a full comparison and a targeted comparison (three EEG measures × two comparisons), and complexity was also examined in a follow-up targeted comparison in which we covaried for delta power (two EEG measures × one comparison). We then adjusted for the total number of tests using a Bonferroni correction, yielding = 0.0063. Effect sizes for each cluster (median across all cluster members) were measured as Cohen’s d.


Results

Herein, we have assessed the degree to which signal complexity can emerge from the pathologically hypersynchronous brain dynamics typical of children with AS and, specifically, whether such dynamics differ significantly with relative level of consciousness (i.e. wake, sleep). We first addressed this question by analyzing all usable EEG data (henceforth, full comparison). We then repeated the analysis while controlling for two possible confounders (henceforth, targeted comparison). All comparisons were within-subject and contrasted awake and asleep EEG recorded from the same EEG session.

Our sample included a cohort of 35 children with AS (15 female), ranging from 13 to 130 months of age (mean ± SD = 47.9 ± 28.6 months), of which 25 had a deletion of chromosome 15q11-q13 and the remaining 10 had other genetic aberrations affecting UBE3A (see for individual demographic details and length of EEG data used in each of the analyses). Qualitative inspection of EEG recordings revealed strongly abnormal EEG patterns in both sleep and wakefulness (see and for examples from a participant without seizures or medications).


Full comparison


Full comparison: EEG delta and alpha/beta power are modulated by sleep in AS

The full comparison revealed peaks in the delta band for both the awake and asleep condition (channel averaged), with a sharper peak in the awake state and a broader peak in the asleep state (see for visualization of the untransformed power). The duration of usable EEG ranged from 3.39 to 167 min (awake state, mean ± SD = 16.7 ± 27.1 min) and 2.89 to 123 min (asleep state, mean ± SD = 17.3 ± 20.1 min); high variance in duration of usable data is likely attributable to the variability of developmental abilities and behavioral phenotype in participants. Differences in EEG measures between the asleep and awake state were revealed by clusters of channels and frequency bins (power) or timescales (complexity) showing similar modulation. Power was generally decreased in wakefulness at frequencies under 20 Hz, with the largest decrease occurring as a 53.0% reduction at f = 1.52 Hz. These changes in wakeful power mapped onto a significant cluster (P < 10−4, cluster permutation test) in channel-frequency space with a spatially diffuse topography that was largest over frontocentral areas (effect size: d = −0.48 ± 0.26, median ± SD; see for full details of clusters). Because the spectral profile of this cluster appeared to “fuse” an oscillatory change in the delta frequency range with an oscillatory change in the alpha-/beta-frequency range, we then repeated the cluster randomization statistics with a stricter threshold (P = 0.0005) to observe the topography of each oscillatory change separately. We also observed a >100% increase in power at high frequencies (f > 28 Hz) in the awake state relative to the asleep state; however, the corresponding cluster did not reach statistical significance (Cluster 4). See for topographic plots of power by frequency band.


Full comparison: EEG complexity is modulated by sleep in AS

We next examined mMSE and gMLZ and found greater EEG signal complexity in the awake state as compared to sleep. Specifically, the channel averaged mSampEn decreased monotonically with faster timescales, but was greater during wakefulness as compared to sleep, with the exception of frequencies ≤ 6.25 Hz (i.e. the five slowest timescales). Greater mMSE during wakefulness was marked by a significant cluster (P = 0.0007, cluster permutation test) covering all channels but largest over central and posterior areas (effect size: d = 0.69 ± 0.12, median ± SD). By comparison, gMLZ increased monotonically with faster timescales and was larger in wakefulness as compared to sleep at all timescales, particularly those with center frequencies corresponding to delta and beta frequencies (channel-averaged). These changes were accompanied by a significant cluster (P < 10−4, cluster permutation test) encompassing 90.8% of channel-timescale space (effect size: d = 0.63 ± 0.32, median ± SD). The cluster appeared to fuse complexity changes corresponding to fast and slow timescales. We thus repeated the analysis, applying a stricter threshold (P = 0.0005) to t-statistics to view the topography of each change separately. Effect sizes in the low-frequency subcluster were large (d = 0.96 ± 0.27). See for complete visualizations of all clusters and for visualizations of individual participants’ data. Participant genotype (deletion or non-deletion) significantly correlated with mMSE and gMLZ at some timescales. This covariate was fully controlled for by the within-subject design of our study.


Targeted comparison

To account for both the large variance in delta amplitude in awake children with AS and the possibility of conscious mentation during NREM sleep, we reinforced our full comparison with a targeted comparison that accounted for the above confounders (i.e. delta variability and conscious mentation) as follows. We addressed the fromer concern by focusing only on the segments of the most abnormal awake state EEG, as operationalized by delta power. We then addressed the latter concern by contrasting the pathological awake state EEG with the periods of asleep state EEG that are the least likely to correspond to any dream experience, as operationalized by the ratio of parietal delta power to high-frequency power (Siclari et al. 2013), where higher values of this ratio correspond to a greater probability of unconsciousness. In other words, we compared the most abnormal segments of EEG still corresponding, nonetheless, to a state of wakeful consciousness, to the segments of sleep EEG least likely to correspond to any conscious experience. By using only these segments, one may expect the findings from the full comparison to disappear if EEG complexity is not always greater during wakefulness as compared to dreamless sleep, e.g., during bouts of especially high-amplitude delta in wakefulness (Sidorov et al. 2017). The duration of selected EEG ranged from 2.07 to 9.44 min (awake state, mean ± SD = 3.96 ± 1.67 min) and 1.48 to 5.32 min (asleep state, mean ± SD = 3.24 ± 1.02 min).


Targeted comparison: EEG low delta power is modulated by sleep in AS

The targeted awake EEG sections were characterized by a prominent peak in the delta band, while the targeted asleep EEG sections were characterized by two delta band peaks at different octaves (channel averaged), which are best visualized in the untransformed power; this suggests the presence of two separate oscillatory processes, one related to sleep and one related more specifically to AS pathology. Decreases in power between the two states were restricted to the delta band (max change: 41.3% decrease at f = 1.34 Hz), with >100% increases also occurring at high frequencies (f > 25 Hz). Permutation cluster statistics identified two small but significant clusters differing between the two states. The first cluster corresponded to decreased power at low delta (1.0–2.2 Hz) frequencies in the awake state (P = 0.0011, cluster permutation test) and lacked a distinct scalp topography (effect size: d = −0.60 ± 0.19, median ± SD). The second cluster corresponded mostly to increased power at largely beta (11.3–32 Hz) frequencies in the awake state (P = 0.0022, cluster permutation test) and displayed a scalp topography suggestive of neck muscle artifact (effect size: d = 0.63 ± 0.24, median ± SD). These results show that, after accounting for the confounders that motivated our targeted comparison, the most reliable spectral differences between sleep and wakefulness were found at low delta frequencies. See for topographic plots of power by frequency band.


Targeted comparison: EEG complexity is modulated by sleep in AS

Analysis of EEG signal complexity in the targeted comparison revealed similar results to the full comparison (channel-averaged). Greater mMSE in wakefulness was marked by a significant cluster (P = 0.001, cluster permutation test) exhibiting similar topography to the corresponding cluster found in the full comparison (effect size: d = 0.67 ± 0.11, median ± SD). The gMLZ curves also exhibited the same behavior seen in the full comparison (channel-averaged) and yielded a significant cluster (P < 10−4, cluster permutation test) marking greater complexity during wakefulness (effect size: d = 0.64 ± 0.32, median ± SD). The cluster appeared to fuse complexity changes corresponding to fast and slow timescales. We thus repeated the analysis, applying a stricter threshold (P = 0.0005) to t-statistics to view the topography of each change separately. Effect sizes in the low-frequency subcluster were large (d = 0.98 ± 0.20, median ± SD). See for complete visualizations of all clusters and for visualizations of individual participants’ data. Participant genotype and log2(age) significantly correlated with mMSE and gMLZ at some timescales. These covariates were fully controlled for by the within-subject design of our study.


Effects of sleep on EEG complexity are not mediated by delta power

As shown in, despite having selected the most pathological segments of the awake EEG dataset, delta power still differed significantly across wakefulness and sleep. Delta power was also negatively correlated with mSampEn at most timescales after averaging across channels, explaining the majority of the variance in mSampEn at fast timescales (R2 > 0.5 for Nyquist frequency ≥ 20 Hz, awake, and Nyquist frequency ≥ 50 Hz, asleep). To account for the possibility that greater regularity (and thus lower complexity) is introduced in sleep merely by greater delta power, we performed a mediation analysis to infer whether changes in complexity were mediated by changes in delta power. Delta power did not mediate the effect of state (i.e. wakefulness versus sleep) on mMSE (P > 0.05 all timescales, uncorrected). Even more so than mMSE, delta power was negatively correlated with gMLZ at most timescales (R2 > 0.5 for center frequency ≥ 2.82 Hz, asleep and awake state). Yet again, delta power did not mediate the effect of state on gMLZ (P > 0.05 all timescales, uncorrected). Given the observed negative relationship between delta power and complexity measures, in what follows we repeated the targeted comparison after covarying for delta power (integrated 1 – 4 Hz).


Targeted comparison: EEG complexity changes are robust to covarying for delta power

Finally, as shown in, our overall findings remained unchanged after controlling for delta power differences across wakefulness and sleep by regressing out 1 − 4 Hz power. Specifically, while mMSE curves were no longer monotonic with timescale, they still show the awake EEG to be more complex than the asleep EEG. The largest increase from sleep occurred at low frequencies (i.e. the fastest timescale; channel-averaged;). This relative increase in mMSE during wakefulness corresponded to a significant (P < 10−4, cluster permutation test) and nearly saturated cluster (effect size: d = 1.92 ± 0.81, median ± SD). With respect to gMLZ, covarying for delta power again leads to the same qualitative result reported above, with wakefulness showing consistently greater complexity than sleep. Intriguingly, however, the divergence in complexity between the two states is even greater after factoring out delta power, with the largest increase from sleep occurring at the center frequency of 22.2 Hz (i.e. the 19th timescale; channel averaged;). The relative increase in gMLZ during wakefulness corresponds to a significant (P < 10−4, cluster permutation test) and, again, nearly saturated cluster (effect size: d = 2.42 ± 1.28, median ± SD). See for complete visualizations of all clusters and for visualizations of individual participants’ data.


Discussion

Children with AS exhibit an EEG phenotype resembling states of diminished consciousness in typical individuals, while also exhibiting purposeful behavior consistent with a state of wakeful awareness, albeit marked by severe intellectual disability. This paradoxical EEG pattern during conscious wakefulness, together with similar circumstances occasionally observed in non-convulsive status epilepticus (Gökyiǧit and Çalişkan 1995), Rett syndrome (Laan and Vein 2002), postoperative delirium (Palanca et al. 2017), schizophrenia (Matsuura et al. 1994), and immediately following tracheal intubation for general anesthesia (Gaskell et al. 2017), challenges the view that high-voltage, slow EEG activity is a reliable marker of loss of consciousness.

At face value, the pathological presence of slow, high-amplitude oscillations during a state of wakeful awareness appears problematic for theoretical frameworks linking consciousness to complexity (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016). This is because the hypersynchronization needed to produce such slow, high-voltage rhythms limits the degrees of freedom on neuronal populations; neurons are entrained to their neighbors, reducing the diversity of cortical activity. With a smaller repertoire of cortical states, the brain exhibits less functional differentiation (Koch et al. 2016) and thus lacks one of the two cardinal elements theoretically needed for a system to be conscious: differentiation and integration (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016). Yet, the data presented above suggest that even in the presence of pathological, global slowing and synchronization of brain dynamics, the complexity of scalp EEG signals still emerges and systematically varies with levels of consciousness. It thus remains an open question whether high-voltage delta rhythms are inversely related to complexity and consciousness in the manner that has been previously assumed (Tononi and Edelman 1998), with at least one recent review on the topic acknowledging that slow waves may occur during consciousness (Koch et al. 2016). The relationship in question is also cast into doubt by recent EEG work with the psychedelic N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) in healthy adult participants showing that both elevated Lempel–Ziv complexity and phenomenologically rich, visual experiences coincide with low-frequency EEG rhythmicity induced by DMT (Timmermann et al. 2019).

Our interpretation of our findings withstands two possible criticisms. First, one may argue that the abnormal EEG phenotype in AS is explained entirely by intellectual disability. From this perspective, the EEG phenotype of awake, behaving children with AS is trivial. However, this perspective would fail to explain how purposeful behaviors that demonstrate consciousness to an observer arise in AS amidst global, high-amplitude delta oscillations that should be expected to diminish consciousness through cortical down-states. (Franks 2008; Rosanova et al. 2018). The fact that children with AS have intellectual disability does nothing to resolve the foregoing paradox given their volitional behavior under these unusual circumstances. In fact, the presence of intellectual disability in AS may strengthen our findings, because differences between sleep and wakefulness are less likely to track cognitive processes such as language—which are severely impaired in AS (Williams 1995; Gentile et al. 2010)—that may otherwise confound studies of consciousness (Montemayor et al. 2019). Incidentally, while cortical hyperexcitability may indeed relate to intellectual disability in AS, similar levels of intellectual impairment occur without high-amplitude delta activity in duplication 15q11.2-q13.1 syndrome, in which the UBE3A locus is duplicated rather than deleted (Frohlich et al. 2016, 2019b).

Other criticism of our interpretation may come from the perspective that our findings are trivial in so far as EEG activity reflects not only conscious brain activity but also subconscious sensorimotor processing. From this perspective, one may argue EEG complexity should always scale with the degree of sensory input and motor output regardless of conscious state. However, when conscious processes go offline and subconscious sensorimotor processing—including auditory and somatosensory processing (Portas et al. 2000; Massimini et al. 2003), semantic processing, (Brualla et al. 1998; Ibáñez et al. 2006), implicit vocabulary learning (Züst et al. 2019), and ambulatory behavior (Zadra et al. 2004)—is preserved during NREM sleep, EEG activity switches from complex, low-voltage, fast activity characterized by high effective connectivity during wakefulness to uniform, high-voltage, slow activity characterized by low effective connectivity during NREM sleep (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Massimini et al. 2005). This switch demonstrates that subconscious sensorimotor processing may occur in the absence of electrophysiological complexity.


EEG biomarkers of consciousness in AS

For each of three candidate biomarkers of consciousness tested (spectral power, mMSE, and gMLZ), we found significant clusters that differentiate sleep from wakefulness in AS. Significant clusters were found regardless of whether we performed a full comparison of all usable data or a targeted comparison of those EEG sections that were least likely to coincide with dream experiences (sleep state) or were especially abnormal as judged by delta EEG power (awake state). The largest within cluster/subcluster effect sizes we observed (without shrinking within condition variance by regressing out delta power) were those belonging to a low-frequency complexity change in the gMLZ cluster [dmedian = 0.96/0.98 (full comparison/targeted comparison), and,. These effect sizes surpassed those observed for spectral power, even when considering low-frequency changes encompassed by the power cluster/subcluster with the largest effects [dmedian = 0.74/0.60 (full comparison/targeted comparison), and]. Topographic visualizations of mMSE clusters revealed greater involvement in posterior regions, suggesting the importance of a posterior hot zone in wakeful consciousness (Melanie Boly et al. 2017). On the other hand, gMLZ clusters showed nearly uniform involvement across the entire scalp, suggesting that gMLZ may have greater sensitivity than mMSE to frontal changes in complexity.

Although our study found that delta power was indeed modulated by diminished consciousness (i.e. sleep) in AS, the effect sizes in both comparisons (dmedian = 0.60 – 0.74) were a fraction of that yielded by a prior comparison of delta power between TD control children and children with AS in the awake state (d = 1.22) (Frohlich et al. 2019a). Expressed as a percent change referenced to wakefulness, delta power increases with sleep in AS by a maximum of 162% at f = 1.5 Hz (mean across channels and participants, full comparison), whereas delta power in AS is greater in the awake state relative to TD control children by 1182% (Frohlich et al. 2019a). Thus, the difference between groups during wakefulness is an order of magnitude greater than the difference within AS with sleep/wakefulness. Because the variance within AS between conscious states is much smaller than the variance between AS and TD control children, caution should be applied when using delta EEG power alone as a biomarker for consciousness.


Neural hypersynchronization in AS

Our results clearly indicate that despite the appearance of global hypersynchronization in AS, there remains sufficient information-rich activity to allow the complex dynamics typical of conscious awareness to arise. Given this observation, how do complex brain dynamics and consciousness emerge against a background of EEG hypersynchronization? As in all scalp EEG recordings, the AS EEG is a superposition of signals from many different cortical processes and regions. To support a state of awareness, there must be a sufficient degree of complex activity in AS during wakefulness (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Tononi et al. 2016), with complexity decreasing as consciousness vanishes (i.e. in sleep). Additionally, there must also be a high-voltage delta signal which drowns out the low-voltage activity in the AS EEG, just as one may no longer hear the chatter of conversation over the chanting of the crowd in an arena when both signals temporally coincide (Baars et al. 2013). To continue this analogy, the total power of all chatter in the arena, and in the brain, may even exceed the total power of the chanting, which, given its greater coordination, is nonetheless easier to detect (Nunez and Srinivasan 2006).

The “chanting” signal in AS, however, must be different from the high-voltage, low-frequency activity typically observed in states of reduced consciousness (Steriade 2000; Alkire et al. 2008; Brown et al. 2010). This is because the trough of such slow oscillations is believed to be associated with decreased consciousness, in sleep and anesthesia, as the system globally enters a down-state characterized by neuronal hyperpolarization (Buzsáki 2006; Destexhe et al. 2007; Wilson 2008; Lewis et al. 2012). Yet, in awake children with AS, consciousness does not appear to be periodically interrupted (from an observer’s perspective) as delta oscillations reach their trough. Because a widespread cortical down-state would silence pyramidal cells, it is reasonable to assume that such a global down-state is incompatible with wakeful, volitional behavior and therefore not the mechanism underlying the delta oscillations observed in awake AS children. Instead, as outlined in, down-states in small, local patches of hypersynchronized tissue may project globally to the scalp by volume conduction in AS, resolving the paradox of diffuse delta activity in wakefulness. Indeed, local OFF-periods (extracellular manifestations of down-states) have been observed during wakefulness in sleep deprived rats (Vyazovskiy et al. 2011), demonstrating that localized patches of cortical silence during wakefulness are possible. Moreover, in patients with epilepsy, intracranial EEG has also revealed the temporal coincidence of local ON- and OFF-periods in different anatomical regions during NREM sleep (Nir et al. 2011; Sarasso et al. 2014; Castelnovo et al. 2018). This coexistence of cortical silence and cortical activity is further suggested by the presence of delta oscillations in scalp EEG recorded from healthy adults in REM sleep (Bernardi et al. 2019), during which individuals are likely to be conscious and the cortex overall active.

The foregoing lines of evidence suggest that delta oscillations in awake children with AS may reflect restricted occurrences of down-states amid a cortex that is otherwise abuzz with complex activity. It is unclear how many such local generators would be required to explain the AS EEG phenotype. Volume conduction from a single delta generator should result in enormously high delta coherence across the scalp. However, the global delta coherence in AS has recently been shown to be similar to that in TD children during both wakefulness and sleep (den Bakker et al. 2018). Thus, if the scenario outlined in is correct, many such local generators may exist in AS. Local field potential recordings from a mouse model of AS have already shown hypersynchronous delta activity in Layer 4 of V1 while mice are awake, head-fixed, and unanaesthetized (Judson et al. 2016; Sidorov et al. 2017). Future studies should continue to explore intracranial recordings in mouse models to delineate the spatial extent of cortical hypersynchronization.

Beyond the delta oscillations described above, the awake state AS delta rhythm may also be closely related to delta oscillations involved in inhibiting competing cognitive functions during wakefulness in healthy adults (Dimitriadis et al. 2010; Harmony 2013). Perhaps due to their pathologically large amplitude and diffuse nature, delta oscillations in AS might result in a broad and continuous state of cognitive inhibition, as reflected in the profound intellectual disabilities typical of this condition.


Conclusion, Limitations, and Future Directions

It is important to be mindful of some shortcomings of the present work. First, given the highly abnormal EEG presentation and the short nature of the sleep events in our data, we could not accurately perform sleep staging. Boundaries between sleep and wakefulness were delineated based on visual observation by the EEG technician and, as such, we acknowledge that sleep defined based solely on behavioral criteria is a limitation of this study. Longer sessions (e.g. 24-h recordings) might be better suited to allow an accurate sleep analysis and comparison of different stages. Furthermore, while data known to contain seizures were discarded, not all EEGs were reviewed by a neurologist and the possible inclusion of absence seizures cannot be ruled out entirely. Also, along these lines, arousal was not monitored during wakefulness, though sections known to contain drowsiness were excluded. Next, we were unable to compare sections of sleep EEG that were most and least likely to coincide with dream experiences (i.e. sleep EEG with the lowest and highest ratio of delta to high-frequency power) due to the circular nature of comparing EEG sections that are already defined such that they differ in power. Lastly, while we reported a relative effect of level of consciousness on complexity metrics, a reference cohort of TD children is needed to assess the overall level of complexity present in the AS EEG.

In conclusion, this work resolves the apparent paradox of wakeful, purposefully behaving, children with AS exhibiting an EEG phenotype most typically associated with states of low/no consciousness (Laan and Vein 2005; Vendrame et al. 2012; Frohlich et al. 2019a). By finding complex brain dynamics that are sensitive to relative level of consciousness even under conditions of extreme cortical hypersychronization, these results suggest that high-voltage, slow EEG activity is not a reliable indicator of unconsciousness. These findings, along with other rare conditions with paradoxical EEG signatures during consciousness (Matsuura et al. 1994; Gökyiǧit and Çalişkan 1995; Laan and Vein 2002), warn against reverse inferring low/no consciousness in patients based on delta power (Fingelkurts et al. 2013; Lechinger et al. 2013). When brain dynamics are severely altered by genetic disorders, epilepsy, or brain injury, complexity-based methods, e.g., perturbational complexity index (Casali et al. 2013; Casarotto et al. 2016; Comolatti et al. 2019), may be better suited for inferring consciousness.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


The science of consciousness does not need another theory, it needs a minimal unifying model

Wanja Wiese — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7352491, CC BY 4.0.

This article discusses a hypothesis recently put forward by Kanai et al., according to which information generation constitutes a functional basis of, and a sufficient condition for, consciousness. Information generation involves the ability to compress and subsequently decompress information, potentially after a temporal delay and adapted to current purposes. I will argue that information generation should not be regarded as a sufficient condition for consciousness, but could serve as what I will call a “minimal unifying model of consciousness.” A minimal unifying model (MUM) specifies at least one necessary feature of consciousness, characterizes it in a determinable way, and shows that it is entailed by (many) existing theories of consciousness. Information generation fulfills these requirements. A MUM of consciousness is useful, because it unifies existing theories of consciousness by highlighting their common assumptions, while enabling further developments from which empirical predictions can be derived. Unlike existing theories (which probably contain at least some false assumptions), a MUM is thus likely to be an adequate model of consciousness, albeit at a relatively general level. Assumptions embodied in such a model are less informative than assumptions made by more specific theories and hence function more in the way of guiding principles. Still, they enable further refinements, in line with new empirical results and broader theoretical and evolutionary considerations. This also allows developing the model in ways that facilitate more specific claims and predictions.

Keywords: theories and models, consciousness, minimal unifying model, free-energy principle, predictive processing, information generation


Introduction

In their article “Information generation as a functional basis of consciousness,” Kanai et al. (2019) suggest that information generation might constitute the functional basis of consciousness. Information generation, as defined in the article, roughly corresponds to the ability to (i) encode information in a format that allows the system to transiently keep the information in memory, in compressed form, and (ii) decompress that information to construct detailed representations (for online or offline processing). Empirically, this claim is supported by studies showing that consciousness requires the ability to keep information in (working) memory. Theoretically, it dovetails nicely with existing theories of consciousness. For instance, it is reminiscent of Gerald Edelman’s notion of a “remembered present” (Edelman 1989). Although Kanai et al. (2019) do not provide a formal definition of information generation, it also resonates with formal approaches to consciousness, such as Tononi et al.’s (2016) integrated information theory (Tononi), Thagard’s and Stewart’s (2014) semantic pointer competition theory, Ruffini’s (2017) Kolmogorov theory (KT), or van Hateren’s (2019) inversed-fitness-estimate theory.

Here, I will discuss the way Kanai et al. (2019) describe the status of their own hypothesis. While their main claim is that information generation is necessary for the functional roles associated with consciousness, they also propose that a stronger hypothesis should be taken into consideration, according to which information generation is sufficient for consciousness. If this is correct, then information generation, conceived as a teleological function, is entailed by consciousness; conceived as a functional mechanism, information generation is even sufficient for consciousness (Kanai et al. 2019, 8). [A mechanism for information generation would then be a mechanism that could explain why different types of evidence for phenomenal consciousness, such as verbal and non-verbal reports, the ability for planning and goal-directed action, etc., typically converge. The reason would be that there is a single mechanism underlying the different abilities that yield evidence for the presence of phenomenal consciousness (see Shea 2012). Of course, this presupposes that the different lines of evidence in fact do converge (contraIrvine, 2017).] Although the authors note that this hypothesis may strike many as implausible, they are ready to embrace the possibility that any system engaged in information generation, e.g. a variational autoencoder, is a conscious system (Kanai et al. 2019, 5). I will argue that a more plausible, and more fruitful hypothesis is that information generation can serve as what I will call a “minimal unifying model of consciousness.” (Strictly speaking, I am not referring to a model, but to a model description (see Weisberg 2007). A model description can, for instance, be given by a set of mathematical equations, but it can also describe the relevant properties of a concrete object, such as a scale model.) By a minimal unifying model of consciousness, I mean a model that

specifies only necessary properties of consciousness (i.e. it does not entail a strong sufficiency claim),

has determinable descriptions that can be made more specific, and

integrates existing approaches to consciousness by highlighting common assumptions.

A minimal unifying model (MUM) is thus minimal in a 2-fold sense: empirically, it is minimal because it only provides necessary conditions for consciousness; conceptually, it is minimal, because it characterizes these conditions in a general way. Still, it can be fruitful, because the characterization it offers can be specified in different ways, for instance, by developing formal definitions of properties characterized by the model. A MUM is unificatory by pointing to the “least common denominator” of existing accounts. All existing theories of consciousness can be expected to contain at least some false assumptions. A MUM, by contrast, seeks to identify assumptions shared by most approaches, thus highlighting the grains of truth that they have in common. [Although I would interchangeably say that a MUM unifies or that it integrates existing accounts, one could draw a distinction between unification and integration. Miłkowski (2016), for instance, characterizes explanatory unification as the project of finding general and simple explanations, whereas explanatory integration combines existing explanations. The project of developing a MUM aims at explanatory unification, not integration. A related approach is advertised by Graziano et al. (2019, 15), who argue that “[w]e may now have a […] family of theories that cohere and provide a working, mechanistic, scientifically meaningful, and even artificially buildable understanding of consciousness.” According to the authors, their own theory (attention schema theory, AST) “can be understood as a specific unification of GW [global workspace theory] and HOT [higher-order thought theory]” (2019, 13). The posits of AST overlap with other theories, and hence may provide a means of combining existing theories—however, this would amount to explanatory integration, not explanatory unification (in the sense of Miłkowski 2016). By contrast, a MUM seeks to abstract away from the dispensable parts of existing accounts, thereby offering a way of replacing existing theories (at least ideally).]

In what follows, I will first draw on a distinction between two types of consciousness: structured consciousness vs. minimal phenomenal experience. This will help to delimit the scope of a MUM and, more specifically, of accounts that associate consciousness with information generation. I will argue that only structured consciousness requires information generation, and, similarly, that a MUM will be most useful for accounts of structured consciousness. After that, I will review the notion of information generation, as characterized by Kanai et al. (2019), and will then argue that a (formal) model of information generation can serve as a MUM. Furthermore, I will explain why such a model is desirable, instead of a theory claiming to provide necessary and sufficient conditions for consciousness. In particular, I will justify the three characteristic features of MUMs of consciousness given above.


Structured Consciousness and Minimal Phenomenal Experience

Most conscious waking states have structured contents: we typically experience many different objects at the same time and relations between them. Perhaps the most general way of describing this structure is in terms of space and time. Temporally, your conscious experience is structured in the sense that you experience events as happening now, which you can distinguish from past events that you consciously remember and from future events that you consciously anticipate. Furthermore, you consciously experience change: visually, you may perceive a bird flying toward its nest; aurally, you may perceive a bird song in which one chirping flows into the next. Spatially, your conscious experience is structured in the sense that you consciously perceive a space (perhaps a room in a building), and items within it (chairs, tables) that are connected by spatial distance relations and part-whole relations [as I argue in Wiese (2017), there are also experienced part-whole relations between experienced events]. Apart from spatiotemporal relations between contents of consciousness, conscious experience also typically has a subject–object structure. I experience everything from a subjective point of view: there is not just something it is like to have my experience, there is something it is like for me to have it (see Nagel 1974; Zahavi and Kriegel 2016).

I will call conscious experience with structured contents “structured consciousness” (see Ruffini 2017). We can contrast structured consciousness with the notion of “minimal phenomenal experience” (MPE). The concept of MPE was introduced by Windt (2015) and refers to the simplest possible type of conscious experience, which is sometimes described as consciousness as such or as pure awareness. More specifically, MPE is “atemporal, selfless, and not tied to an individual first-person perspective” (Metzinger 2020, 36). In particular, MPE does not have structured contents, although it may have unstructured content (Metzinger 2020, 38). That is, MPE is characterized by an absence of experienced spatial, temporal, or subject–object relations. Instances of MPE may occur, for instance, during dreamless sleep episodes (Windt et al. 2016), but it is also possible that MPE in fact underlies all conscious experiences (so it could even be present in instances of structured consciousness).

There are some commonalities between what I call a “minimal unifying model of consciousness” and the notion of MPE. If MPE underlies all types of experience, then MPE may have a unifying phenomenal character, and a model of MPE may provide a crucial building block for a complete theory of consciousness. However, it would not be a unifying model in the sense specified here, because it would not point to assumptions that most existing theories of consciousness have in common (this is simply because most existing theories are theories of structured consciousness, not of minimal phenomenal experience)—which constitutes a key difference to features implied by a MUM. Still, developing a model of MPE and developing MUMs can be seen as complementary strategies.

In what follows, I will focus on structured consciousness. Conscious experiences with structured contents require information generation, and a MUM will be most useful for accounts of structured consciousness (because most existing approaches focus on structured consciousness).


What Is Information Generation?

In the first sections of their article, Kanai et al. (2019) characterize information generation as a teleological function, i.e. in terms of the purpose served by it. The purpose is to enable “non-reflexive behavior such as responding after a delay, or executing an action based on internally generated plans” (Kanai et al. 2019, 3). According to the authors, this requires “the ability to internally generate sensory representations that are not direct reflections of the current sensory input.” (Kanai et al. 2019, 3). Furthermore, tasks that (apparently) require conscious processing have in common that they presuppose the ability to make information available for cognitive subsystems after a short delay (see Kanai et al. 2019, 2–3). In conscious perception, for instance, information about a perceptual object must be flexibly available even when the object itself is not present anymore. This provides evidence for the hypothesis that information generation is a function of consciousness. As a next step, the authors suggest that what achieves this function is the computational process of internally generating (possibly) counterfactual representations. In addition, they highlight connections to, among others, reinforcement learning, predictive processing, and active inference.

Is information generation just the act of representing actual or counterfactual states of affairs? That would strike many as too liberal. As it turns out, the authors make a slightly more specific claim, by linking information generation to the process of “producing representations” using generative models (Kanai et al. 2019, 4), in a way that involves a “mapping from an abstract low-dimensional representation to a high-dimensional representation in the data (i.e. sensory) space” (Kanai et al. 2019, 5). In the brain, this may be implemented by feedback predictions (as suggested by predictive processing; see Hohwy 2013; Clark 2016; Wiese and Metzinger 2017), but purely feedforward implementations are possible as well (as an example, the authors discuss variational autoencoders, see Kanai et al. 2019, 4–5).

If we consider the hypothesized function of consciousness again, it seems that the essential part of this is that information is not just stored and, after a delay, reactivated, but that the information is first compressed and then becomes decompressed. Generative models are statistical models of the relation between sensory signals and their hidden causes, i.e. a generative model is a model of how sensory signals are generated. This suggests that “decompression” should be interpreted as a probabilistic computation, in which the uncompressed representation constitutes a (or the most) likely hypothesis, given the compressed information. In other words, it seems that decompression involves a probabilistic filling in of information that is not present in the compressed representation. In line with this, information generation should not be conceived of as a passive process of using an internal “mirror of nature” (Rorty 1979), but as an active process of producing representations that are based on stored information and have been adapted to current purposes.

This constitutes a difference to a related suggestion by Cleeremans (2005, 90): “Stability in time refers to how long a representation can be maintained active during processing. […] Stability of representation is clearly related to availability to consciousness, to the extent that consciousness takes time.” Stability, as characterized in the quoted passage, only requires that information be stored in a way that makes it available after a delay. Information generation, by contrast, also seems to require that the information be stored in a way that enables using it for different purposes (e.g. by compressing it), which means that further processing is necessary before the stored information can be used.


What Type of Information Is “Generated” in Information Generation?

One could suspect that information generation does not really involve the generation of information: a decompressed representation does not contain any more information than was contained in its compressed form; it is only more redundant. To clarify in what sense information is generated by decompressing, it will be helpful to consider links between Kanai et al.’s (2019) account and Ruffini’s (2017) Kolmogorov theory (KT) of consciousness.

Kanai et al. (2019, 4) suggest that information generation in the brain involves generative models. The brain does not produce uncompressed representations in the way a personal computer decompresses a zip folder. Rather, an uncompressed representation is produced on the basis of a generative model. This generative model can, for instance, contain information about how internally generated actions will change the incoming flow of sensory signals (Adams et al. 2013). This allows the brain to anticipate sensory signals during action. A high-level representation of a motor intent constitutes a compressed representation, and a prediction of sensory signals, derived in accordance with a generative model, constitutes a decompressed representation. Crucially, the way action affects sensory signals is context-sensitive, which already points to one sense in which information is generated: the generative model encodes context-sensitive information (Gandolla et al. 2014), ensuring that information about the context is reflected by the process of decompression and in this sense contained in the decompressed representation (whereas it was not contained in the compressed representation).

Ruffini’s (2017) KT can help to further clarify the importance of (generative) models. According to KT, signals produced by the brain (e.g. motor commands or signals measured using EEG or MEG) during episodes of consciousness appear to be complex, but are produced by simple models (Ruffini 2017, 5). As a consequence, data streams produced by the conscious brain can be compressed. Formally, this means the algorithmic complexity (also called “Kolmogorov complexity”) of data produced by the brain appears to be high, but is in fact low. The algorithmic complexity of a string is the length of the shortest program that can generate the string (see Cover and Thomas 2006). A program that produces the string in question embodies an algorithm for producing the string, hence the name algorithmic complexity.

Recall that a generative model can be regarded as a model of how sensory signals are generated, and thereby specifies how to compute sensory signals from assumptions about their hidden causes. In other words, a generative model entails an algorithm for generating (predictions of) sensory signals. KT emphasizes the assumption that even seemingly complex sensory signals can be predicted using simple models. A general strategy to reduce complexity is to use a hierarchical (deep) model (which is highlighted by predictive processing and active inference; see Friston et al. 2018).

KT further suggests that there is a form of correspondence between sensory signals and data streams produced by conscious brains: the sensory input will be compressible to some extent, but, given the data produced by a conscious brain in response to sensory signals, the sensory input will be even more compressible (formally, this means that the “mutual algorithmic information” between the input and the “response” of a conscious agent is high, see Ruffini 2017, 6).

These two aspects highlighted by KT, i.e. simple models and a correspondence between sensory signals and internally generated data streams, can be traced back to a more fundamental assumption, provided by Friston’s (2010) free-energy principle (FEP). According to FEP, the brain minimizes variational free energy, a quantity that can equivalently be expressed in different ways, one of which involves terms for complexity and accuracy. Consequently, by minimizing free energy, the brain maximizes accuracy and minimizes complexity. As Friston (2010) points out, minimizing complexity “ensures that no excessive parameters are applied in the generative model and leads to a parsimonious representation of sensory data” (Friston 2010, 131). In other words, a system that minimizes free energy uses simple models to generate seemingly complex data streams (e.g. predictions of sensory signals or adaptive action). Furthermore, by maximizing accuracy, a system maximizes the mutual information between sensory input and internal responses (ibid.).

Summing up, KT can help to further clarify the notion of information generation. FEP can, in addition to this, provide a fundamental framework within which more specific (formal) definitions of information generation could be developed.


Is Information Generation Necessary or Sufficient for Consciousness?

What is the empirical evidence for the hypothesis that information generation is necessary for consciousness, and for the stronger hypothesis that information generation is sufficient for consciousness? Kanai et al. proceed by noting that there are cognitive capacities that seem to require consciousness: empirical results suggest that bridging a temporal gap in classical conditioning, a delayed response to perceptual stimuli, and planning are impossible without consciousness (or without conscious processing of the information in question). Hence, the hypothesis “that a key function of consciousness is to allow non-reflexive behavior such as responding after a delay, or executing an action based on internally generated plans” (Kanai et al. 2019, 3) is empirically plausible. This suggests that non-reflexive behavior (NRB) requires consciousness. Furthermore, it seems that diverse types of NRB all require information generation (in the sense discussed above). If consciousness is necessary for NRB, then NRB is sufficient for consciousness. Furthermore, if NRB requires information generation, then NRB is sufficient for information generation. But it does not follow that information generation is necessary for consciousness (let alone sufficient for consciousness). See for an illustration. It is striking that many capacities that require consciousness also require information generation, but assuming an entailment relation between consciousness and information generation constitutes an additional step.

As intimated above, the idea that information generation is a central function of consciousness resonates with many existing theories of consciousness. By discussing relations to various existing approaches, Kanai et al. (2019, 6–7) highlight the importance of information generation for diverse phenomena such as regret, planning, the learning of causal relationships, perceptual presence, illusions, and dreaming. This provides evidence for the claim that information generation is necessary for consciousness (as noted in section “Structured consciousness and minimal phenomenal experience” above, this may not be true for minimal phenomenal experience). But it does not establish that information generation is sufficient for consciousness. As I will argue below, the hypothesis that information generation is necessary for consciousness should be regarded as the central contribution made by Kanai et al. (2019). The hypothesis that all forms of NRB entail consciousness is compatible with this hypothesis, but is not required (and may in fact be unnecessarily strong). The resulting view on the relationship between consciousness, NRB, and information generation is illustrated by.


What Is a MUM of Consciousness?

Here, I shall suggest that information generation can serve as a MUM of consciousness. A MUM specifies only necessary properties of consciousness, involves determinable descriptions that can be made more specific, and integrates existing approaches to consciousness. More specifically, a MUM is characterized by the following features:

Empirically, it is minimal by specifying properties that most states of consciousness have in common; i.e. it specifies only necessary features of (most) conscious experiences.

Conceptually, it is minimal by offering a determinable characterization of these properties that can be refined in various ways.

Furthermore, a MUM is unifying to the extent that it highlights assumptions that existing approaches have in common.

One could object that theoretical unification is completely unwarranted at this stage of the science of consciousness (but see Graziano et al. 2019). Rather than having a set of established and generally accepted theories, the science of consciousness is marked by competing theories that could, for all we know, turn out to be completely false. This is in stark contrast to the situation in, say, theoretical physics, in which quantum mechanics and general relativity are two generally accepted theories that do not compete, but account for different parts of reality (different forces). Hence, a unifying theory in theoretical physics (i.e. a theory of quantum gravity), is desirable. In contrast to this, the objection continues, the study of consciousness should not aim for unification, but should develop new, better theories, that make novel testable predictions and have advantages over existing theories. In particular, it would be desirable to have more specific theories, not a model that is more general than existing theories, and does not promote research by suggesting novel empirical predictions.

The objection ignores that theories of consciousness fulfill a dual role: first, they have to provide an empirically adequate (operationalized) definition of consciousness; secondly, they have to provide an explanation of consciousness, i.e. show how (and why) properties of physical systems give rise to conscious experience. The first role requires specifying the explanandum (i.e. what it is that a theory purports to explain); the second role requires specifying an explanans (i.e. a specification of the properties that account for the explanandum). The first role requires conceptual work (this is not to say that it only requires conceptual work, and not even that it requires mainly conceptual work; empirical results provide constraints on concepts of consciousness, and Kanai et al.’s article shows how empirical case studies can inform a conception of the functional basis of consciousness). The second role requires mainly empirical work. A MUM is primarily concerned with the first role. Furthermore, since a MUM is determinable (feature 2; see the following section for an explanation), it can be used to derive novel predictions, if further assumptions are added. As such, a MUM functions more like a framework than like a theory, because it allows more specific developments in different directions, that still conform to the same, overarching assumptions or guiding principles.

A potential additional virtue of this feature is that it may circumvent the problem that there is no general agreement on how to measure consciousness. Different criteria for the ascription of consciousness may come to diverging results in many cases (see Irvine 2017). Therefore, it can be useful to start with a determinable criterion that is necessary, but not sufficient for the ascription of consciousness (and hence less controversial). If indeed phenomenal consciousness is not a unique natural kind (contraShea 2012), then a MUM could still be used to show what different kinds of phenomenal consciousness have in common.

In the next section, I will suggest that information generation satisfies the three requirements on MUMs, and will argue, against Kanai et al. (2019), that information generation should not be considered as being sufficient for consciousness.


Information Generation as a MUM of Consciousness

In claiming that information generation is necessary for consciousness, Kanai et al. (2019) agree with the first two requirements on MUMs, but they suggest that information generation should also be taken into consideration when it comes to sufficient properties. I have three reasons for seeing this differently.

First, the empirical support for the sufficiency claim is too weak to justify it. In particular, the claim is challenged by possible cases of working memory without consciousness (Rosenthal et al. 2010; Soto et al. 2011; Trübutschek et al. 2017). While the debate about this is ongoing (Persuh et al. 2018; Nakano and Ishihara 2020), it nevertheless shows that the claim stands on empirically shaky feet.

Secondly, even if most states of consciousness can be described as a particular type of information generation, saying that consciousness is information generation is almost empty (just as the claim that consciousness can be described as inference, cf. Friston 2018). Arguably, a substantial version of the claim that consciousness is information generation must at least make a connection to (potential) action (see Seth 2009; Morsella et al. 2016; Pennartz 2017). For instance, a variational autoencoder is not capable of generating actions, and this alone may suffice to reject the claim that information generation implemented by such a system gives rise to consciousness. More generally, information generation should be regarded as a determinable property that itself is not sufficient for consciousness—although specific ways of generating information (i.e. some determinates of the determinable information generation) could be sufficient for consciousness. In general, a determinable is a property with respect to which more specific properties exist. These more specific properties are called determinates (Wilson 2017). For instance, red and blue are two different determinates of the same determinable color. Being blue is a particular way of being colored. Note that blue is a determinate with respect to color, but it is a determinable with respect to more specific properties, such as azure or cyan. In the context of a MUM, this means that a determinable such as information generation can not only be specified in different ways, but a given specification can, subsequently, be further specified. That is, the project of providing more specific models can be carried out step by step, yielding ever more determinate specifications of properties such as information generation.

Thirdly, focusing on the sufficiency claim distracts from the commonalities with existing theories of consciousness. Since all current theories are likely to contain at least some false assumptions, it will be more fruitful to consider to what extent information generation is entailed by existing theories. Identifying common assumptions is, I submit, more likely to track true assumptions than positing yet another theory of consciousness.

In line with Seth (2016), I have elsewhere (Wiese 2018a) argued that the real problem of consciousness consists in explaining all characteristic features of consciousness (such as global availability, information integration, temporal information). A challenge is created by the fact that a collection of features does not necessarily point to a unified concept of consciousness. Since measures of consciousness can come to different results in many cases, one could doubt that there is a single phenomenon, i.e. consciousness, that can be captured by a single scientific concept (see Irvine 2017). My proposal in Wiese (2018a) is to seek the help of a formal characterization of consciousness, based on as little assumptions as possible, which may then be shown to entail characteristic features of consciousness, given further, more specific assumptions (see also Wiese 2018b). For instance, minimizing (expected) free energy in deep models (which have temporal thickness) is a process that already entails many features associated with consciousness, although it is not sufficient for consciousness (contraFriston 2018). Similarly, a formal model of information generation could help to develop more specific formal characterizations that entail more features of consciousness (possibly even using the framework provided by Friston’s free-energy principle; cf. the remarks in the section “What type of information is ‘generated’ in information generation?” above). Even if it should turn out that phenomenal consciousness is not a unique natural kind, it could still be possible to regard different kinds of phenomenal consciousness as different types of information generation. Furthermore, information generation as a MUM of consciousness could help to discover the evolutionary basis of consciousness, e.g. by considering the relationship between information generation and what Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019) call the “evolutionary transition marker of consciousness” (which they propose to identify with unlimited associative learning).


Conclusion: The Science of Consciousness Is in Its Infancy, It Needs a MUM

Kanai et al. (2019) make the compelling claim that information generation could serve as a functional basis for consciousness. In contrast to what the authors claim, I have argued that information generation should not be considered as a sufficient condition for consciousness (i.e. it is very likely that information generation is possible without consciousness). Instead, I suggested that information generation could serve as a MUM of consciousness. A MUM specifies at least one necessary feature of consciousness, characterizes it by making as little further assumptions as possible, and shows that it is entailed by (many) existing theories of consciousness. The claim that the feature is necessary must be justified by empirical studies, showing that (i) the absence of this feature goes along with unconscious processing, and (ii) functional roles associated with consciousness require this feature. Information generation, as illustrated using the variational auto-encoder, satisfies these requirements. It can therefore be regarded as a MUM. Having a MUM is useful, because it unifies existing theories of consciousness by highlighting their common assumptions, while enabling further developments from which empirical predictions can be derived. Unlike existing theories (which probably contain at least some false assumptions), a MUM is thus likely to make true assumptions about consciousness. These assumptions may be less informative than assumptions made by more specific theories, and hence function more in the way of guiding principles. Still, this enables further refinements, in line with new empirical results and broader theoretical and evolutionary considerations. Furthermore, this also allows developing the model in different ways that facilitate more specific claims and predictions. Hence, having a MUM is likely to constitute a key step in developing a mature science of consciousness, and, eventually, a complete and adequate theory of consciousness.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

No data were used to write this opinion article (except for the sources listed in the reference section).

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


The Dream Catcher experiment: blinded analyses failed to detect markers of dreaming consciousness in EEG spectral power

William Wong, Valdas Noreika, Levente Móró, Antti Revonsuo, Jennifer Windt, Katja Valli, Naotsugu Tsuchiya — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7362719, CC BY 4.0.

The Dream Catcher test defines the criteria for a genuine discovery of the neural constituents of phenomenal consciousness. Passing the test implies that some patterns of purely brain-based data directly correspond to the subjective features of phenomenal experience, which would help to bridge the explanatory gap between consciousness and brain. Here, we conducted the Dream Catcher test for the first time in a step-wise and simplified form, capturing its core idea. The Dream Catcher experiment involved a Data Team, which measured participants’ brain activity during sleep and collected dream reports, and a blinded Analysis Team, which was challenged to predict, based solely on brain measurements, whether or not a participant had a dream experience. Using a serial-awakening paradigm, the Data Team prepared 54 1-min polysomnograms of non-rapid eye movement sleep—27 of dreamful sleep and 27 of dreamless sleep (three of each condition from each of the nine participants)—redacting from them all associated participant and dream information. The Analysis Team attempted to classify each recording as either dreamless or dreamful using an unsupervised machine learning classifier, based on hypothesis-driven, extracted features of electroencephalography (EEG) spectral power and electrode location. The procedure was repeated over five iterations with a gradual removal of blindness. At no level of blindness did the Analysis Team perform significantly better than chance, suggesting that EEG spectral power could not be utilized to detect signatures specific to phenomenal consciousness in these data. This study marks the first step towards realizing the Dream Catcher test in practice.

HighlightsThe present study is the first reported attempt of the Dream Catcher test.Previously reported EEG markers of NREM dreaming were not identified by our blind analyses.The correlates of conscious experience may not be detectable in EEG spectral power.


Introduction


Background

If we take consciousness to be a natural, biological phenomenon that depends on the neural activity of the brain, then there must be objective patterns of brain activity that directly constitute consciousness and therefore correspond to the subjective features of experience. Whatever type of neural activity consciousness turns out to be, it must be something that incarnates the spatiotemporal patterns of phenomenal experience.

The Dream Catcher test was introduced as an empirical criterion for what would constitute a genuine scientific discovery of the underlying neural constituents of phenomenal consciousness (Revonsuo 2006). The present empirical study, which we call the Dream Catcher experiment, is the first attempt to execute a simplified version of such a test. The test itself was originally conceived as an idealized thought experiment, devised to address the explanatory gap that exists between any physical explanation of consciousness and the phenomenal experience of consciousness itself—the so-called ‘hard problem’ (Levine 1983; Chalmers 1995). Arguably, even if one were able to identify the neural correlates of consciousness, those would not suffice to bridge the explanatory gap: correlations do not in themselves provide an explanation for a phenomenon. Revonsuo (2006) proposed that consciousness would be genuinely explained by the discovery of constitutive mechanisms of consciousness at the phenomenal level. [For the crucial distinction between correlates and constituents, see also Revonsuo (2001) and Miller (2015).]

To verify the constitutive mechanisms of consciousness, the Dream Catcher test requires researchers to be able to predict the qualitative features of participants’ phenomenal experience based only on observations of their brain activity, and without access to any information about the participants’ stimulus environment, subjective experience or correlated brain patterns to known perceptual stimuli. This would be achieved by the following proposed stipulations. First, the study of consciousness would be restricted to the domain of sleep, to ensure that the contents of consciousness are largely unrelated to external stimuli. Second, the researchers charged with testing their brain-based model of consciousness would be blinded to participants’ subjective reports, which would be instead recorded by an independent team. These restrictions make the Dream Catcher test a kind of no-report paradigm: a study design aiming to prevent the conflation between processes underlying conscious experience and those underlying the act of reporting conscious experience (Tsuchiya et al. 2015). During sleep, the disconnection between external stimuli and subjective experience also prevents the conflation between conscious experience and external stimulus processing, which—while central to waking perception—plays a minimal role in dreams.

Conscious mentation is not just frequent in REM sleep but also occurs throughout the majority of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (Nielsen 2000; Noreika et al. 2009; Nir and Tononi 2010; Windt et al. 2016). Recently, specific spectral changes in sleep electroencephalography (EEG) have been found in studies contrasting periods of NREM sleep associated with reports of dreaming against periods without dream recall (Esposito et al. 2004; Chellappa et al. 2011; Siclari et al. 2014, Scarpelli et al. 2017; Siclari et al. 2018; Zhang and Wamsley 2019; for a review, see Ezquerro-Nassar and Noreika 2019). These studies concurred that reduced low-frequency EEG power correlates with dream recall, although they neither agreed on the source location of this difference, nor on whether high-frequency activity was also correlated with dream reports.

For our study, the Dream Catcher experiment, we aimed to address the implications of the Dream Catcher test in practice. We have highly simplified the original Dream Catcher test due to the current limitations of neuroscientific knowledge and brain activity measuring capability. Instead of requiring researchers to reconstruct the content of phenomenal experience from a comprehensive set of brain activity data, we introduced a more realistic requirement: to identify the presence vs. absence of dreaming (i.e. the presence vs. absence of conscious experience) from polysomnograms, without access to the self-reports on whether the participants had dreamt or not. Some studies have investigated neural correlates of specific dream content (Dresler et al. 2012; Horikawa et al. 2013; Horikawa and Kamitani 2017; Siclari et al. 2017), but reconstruction of the full phenomenal level would be a step for the distant future.


Measures of consciousness

Early polysomnography (PSG) consisted of the measurement of voltage fluctuations at various sites of the body, traced onto continuous paper feed, to be interpreted and classified by researchers by visual inspection. Based on features such as the frequency of oscillations at the scalp, intensity of muscle tone activity and type of eye movement, researchers found that they could classify distinct stages of sleep. Remarkably, the REM stage of sleep was found to highly correlate with dream reports, albeit not to be necessary nor sufficient (Aserinsky and Kleitman 1953; Foulkes 1962; Jouvet 1967). Researchers have since increased the array of tools for analysing electrophysiological sleep data, including spectral methods, phase coherence measures and the vast variety of methods devoted to time series analysis in general (Cohen 2014; Arsiwalla and Verschure 2018). Many features of brain electrophysiology have been investigated and reported to correlate with different levels of consciousness. Spectral power differences have been commonly found at characteristic frequency bands; notably, loss of consciousness due to deep sleep and deep general anaesthesia has been associated with increased power at low frequencies [i.e. delta waves, <4 Hz (Noachtar et al. 1999)] (Thomsen et al. 1991; Hobson and Pace-Schott 2002; Evans 2003; Chellappa et al. 2011; Murphy et al. 2011; Scarpelli et al. 2017; Siclari et al. 2017, Scheinin et al. 2018; Zhang and Wamsley 2019). Higher levels of conscious arousal have also been suggested to correlate with a lower spectral exponent (Colombo et al. 2019), higher signal entropy or complexity (Bruhn et al. 2000; Bein 2006; King et al. 2013; Liang et al. 2013; Ouyang et al. 2013; Liang et al. 2015;Sarasso et al. 2015; Schartner et al. 2015; Hudetz et al. 2016; D’Andola et al. 2017), stronger phase coherence between brain areas (Nieminen et al. 2016; Bola et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2017; Mikulan et al. 2017) and more causally integrated brain areas (Barrett et al. 2012; Fasoula et al. 2013; D’Andola et al. 2017).

With an ever-increasing number of methods, we must be wary that almost surely a proportion of reported effects are false positives. Particularly in cognitive neuroscience and psychology, the high prevalence of unreplicable studies has been a serious issue (Fanelli 2009; Kriegeskorte et al. 2009; Vul et al. 2009; Schooler 2014). In this regard, a distinguishing feature of the Dream Catcher test is its blinded nature; it prevents biasing researchers towards a certain outcome due to knowing the true conditions of their samples.


Study design

The Dream Catcher experiment involved two teams. The first team was composed of Valdas Noreika, Levente Móró, Antti Revonsuo and Katja Valli, who designed the Dream Catcher protocol and collected data for the overall experiment—we will call this the Data Team. The second team was composed of William Wong, Jennifer Windt and Naotsugu Tsuchiya, who analysed and classified the brain-based data with restricted access to participants’ dream reports—we will call this the Analysis Team. The team made their classification attempts once for each of five steps of the experiment, where additional information was revealed to them after each step. At the beginning of the experiment, the Analysis Team only knew (i) published details of the Dream Catcher’s data collection method using the early night serial-awakening protocol (Noreika et al. 2009), (ii) the scientific literature on dreaming and consciousness published at the time (pre-2018), (iii) the Data Team’s instruction sheet, and (iv) some additional background information from occasional email exchanges with the Data Team regarding the Dream Catcher procedure.

For the Dream Catcher experiment, we focused on dreams occurring within NREM sleep Stages 2–3 in balanced proportions. By contrasting the recorded brain activity between reported dreaming and non-dreaming states in NREM sleep rather than in REM sleep, we expected to better isolate the effect of the presence vs. absence of dreams in the data. Unlike in REM sleep, which has a dream recall prevalence of about 80% (Hobson et al. 2000; Nielsen 2000), the frequency of dream reports obtained from Stages 2–3 of NREM sleep is roughly equal to that of non-dream reports (Nielsen 2000; Noreika et al. 2009). NREM dreams in general tend to be more fragmented, thought-like, and less vivid than REM sleep dreams (Hobson et al. 2000; Mutz and Javadi 2017). There is a contention that the non-vivid sleep mentation in NREM sleep should be categorized separately and that only multimodal, narratively complex and often emotional experiences, which are more typical of REM sleep, should be classified as dreaming (Hobson et al. 2000). However, as we were interested in the presence vs. absence of even minimal forms of consciousness, we shall refer to all reports of mentation during NREM sleep as dreams in this article (for a more detailed discussion on this theoretical position, see Discussion section).

Please note the unusual structure of our article, which stems from our complex experimental setup. In the General Methods section, we describe the Data Team’s data collection procedures and the Dream Catcher experiment protocol, and give an overview of the Analysis Team’s strategy for blind classification. The particular procedures and results of the Analysis Team at each blinded step are described in the Blind Classification Methods and Results section. This section chronicles irrevocable decisions made by the Analysis Team over multiple steps of the experiment, and consequently, a number of analyses and procedures are different between each step of blind classification. We close with a discussion of the theoretical and methodological implications of the results for the Dream Catcher paradigm and dream research.


General Methods

Study design, data collection and the blinding procedure were performed exclusively by the Data Team before any contact with the Analysis Team. The study protocol was approved by the Ethical Board of the University of Turku; all participants signed informed consent following the Declaration of Helsinki. Data collection was conducted at the Sleep Laboratory at the Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience at the University of Turku.


Participants and data collection

Fifteen Finnish-speaking volunteers were recruited to the study from a larger pool of candidates. They were screened to have no issues with psychological and neurological health, take no central-nervous-system-affecting drugs, or have any sleep disorders at the time of the study. Their handedness was tested by means of the Edinburgh Handedness Questionnaire (Oldfield 1971).

Participants spent one adaptation night in the sleep laboratory, in which the researchers aimed to assess the participants’ sleep latency and ability to give clear dream reports, as well as to familiarize them with sleep laboratory environment. Five participants were excluded following adaptation nights due to sleeping difficulties in the laboratory, unclear dream reports upon awakening from NREM sleep, and/or sleep EEG artefacts due to sweating. The remaining 10 participants spent four experimental nights in the laboratory, for which each participant was compensated with 100 euros in total. One of the participants did not recall any dreams upon awakening from NREM sleep, hence this person’s data were not used in the Dream Catcher experiment. The final data set utilized in the study was collected from nine participants (four males), aged 21–34 years (M = 27, SD = 5.4). Of the nine participants, eight were fully right-handed and one was fully left-handed. Dream reports and PSGs were collected during the first 3–4 h of sleep following an early night serial-awakening paradigm (Noreika et al. 2009). Refer to for our sleep data collection procedures and methods, for the interview procedure and for transcribed exemplar dream reports.


Data selection and blinding

All collected dream reports were divided by two blind raters (Master students in psychology) into four categories following Dement (1955): (i) dreamless sleep, (ii) white dream (i.e. the participant strongly felt they had had some experiences right before awakening, but could not recall any specific content), (iii) uncertain and (iv) dreamful (see for details). For the Dream Catcher experiment, only the (i) dreamless and (iv) dreamful categories were considered. The lowest number of reports from either category from a single participant was three. Following this constraint, three dreamful and three dreamless sleep reports were selected from the nine participants, yielding a pool of 54 reports and the corresponding 1-min pre-awakening EEG segments.

The following criteria were applied in the data selection: (i) Both blind raters should have independently agreed on the basic recall category of the report. (ii) All included dreams should be static (i.e. categories 1–4 of Orlinsky’s Modified Scale for Perceptual Complexity of Dreams; Orlinsky 1962; Noreika et al. 2009) in order to reduce the variability of reports. The categories encompass experiences that are either composed of several interconnected perceptual experiences or are short but coherent dreams, the elements of which are integrated into a unified scene. Static dreams were chosen for two reasons. First, static dreams provided us with a relatively homogeneous group of dreamful cases in terms of the phenomenological features of the dreams. Second, static dream reports are much more abundant in early night NREM sleep awakenings, with complex dynamic dreams being more rare. (iii) The 60-s pre-awakening EEG should contain only NREM Stage 2 and/or Stage 3 epochs (i.e. three consecutive 20-s epochs of either or both Stages 2 and 3), scored using Rechtschaffen and Kales’ (1968) guidelines. (iv) The proportions of Stages 2 and 3 pre-awakening epochs across recall categories should not be significantly different within- nor between-participants. (Notably, we scored sleep stages in 20-s epochs rather than the more typical 30-s divisions, thus a mixture of NREM Stages 2 and 3 epochs were often present within a single 60-s pre-awakening EEG segment. We matched the proportions of these stages between dreamful and dreamless sleep conditions. The difference in number of any particular NREM Stage epoch between the dream report conditions for each participant was no more than one, and the pooled number of any particular NREM Stage epoch did not differ between the conditions. See for the frequency count.) (v) Selected EEG recordings should have the least amount of artefacts, assessed by visual inspection, for each participant.

Regarding the homogeneity of Stage 2 and 3 epochs, it should be noted that slow wave activity (SWA) in general gradually increases during the course of each NREM episode and then rapidly decreases shortly before the beginning of a REM episode (Dijk 2009). We therefore attempted to control for the duration of sleep and particular sleep stages before each awakening. In our data, the time interval between the start of sleep to the first awakening was approximately matched between awakenings that yielded dream reports (M = 7264 s, SD = 3994 s) and awakenings that resulted in reports of dreamless sleep (M = 8026 s, SD = 5369 s; t(8) = −0.72, P = 0.49, Cohen’s d = 0.16). Furthermore, we woke the subjects up as soon as they had remained in the target sleep stage for 3 to 4 min. There was a non-significant trend towards a shorter duration of sleep before dreamful reports (M = 570 s, SD = 240 s) compared to dreamless reports (M = 685 s, SD = 166; t(8) = −1.85, P = 0.10, Cohen’s d = 0.56). Nonetheless, the proportion of time spent in specific stages of sleep before awakening was also balanced between dreamless and dreamful conditions as part of fulfilling criterion (iv) of data selection. Generally, SWA also decreases as the night progresses (Dijk 2009). To check whether SWA decreased between serial awakenings during the 3- to 4-h data collection period, we have previously examined whether the EEG spectral power differed between epochs of sleep associated with earlier vs. later awakenings (Noreika et al. 2009). We found that power measurements did not differ between them, assuring us that SWA did not differ between sleep epochs associated with earlier and later awakenings of early night sleep.

The blind classification phase of the study was to be undertaken by the Analysis Team. The dataset was blinded using a custom Perl script. This 219-line code loaded the metadata (such as the original recording number, the original participant number, the Session number and the ‘dreamful’ or ‘dreamless’ Condition label) from a comma-separated values file describing the parameters of the 54 samples. The recordings were randomly assigned labels with a consecutive numerical range: a general recording label (ID01–ID54), a participant label (S1–S9), a dreamfulness condition label (C1–C2), a participant-grouped condition label (G01–G18; i.e. 9 Participants × 2 Conditions), and a pairing label (P01–P27; i.e. 9 Participants × 3 Sessions) for pairs of dreamful vs. dreamless recordings from the same participant under the same condition. All these labels were logged into a Microsoft Excel table to be used by the Data Team for evaluating the Analysis Team’s blinded analysis results. Finally, the script output a Windows batch file that renamed the original recording files to their randomized ID01–ID54 file names, to be received by the Analysis Team.


Blind Classification Methods and Results

We refer to the individual 1-min PSG recordings, given to the Analysis Team, as ‘cases’. In, we present a review of what information was given to the Analysis Team at each step of this blind classification task, as well as the terms we use in this article to refer to the various groupings of the cases revealed during the experiment. The terms are also illustrated in.


Overall strategy

The methods described in this section were devised independently of the Data Team. The Analysis Team approached the classification problem firstly as a clustering problem. They assumed that brain states would be more homogeneous during non-dreaming than during dreaming, because various contents of dreaming would possibly diversify brain states. Such homogeneity would be amenable to cluster analysis, which is ideally suited to discover and group observations of high similarity in an objective manner, based on extracted features of the data. The Analysis Team would only need to make a subjective determination of dreamfulness in line with previous findings once two clusters were produced (a choice with only two alternatives).

The Analysis Team operated primarily in the Matlab software environment (The MathWorks, Inc. 2012); some of the EEG data handling was facilitated by the EEGLAB toolbox in Matlab (Delorme and Makeig 2004). We will specify otherwise where relevant.


Clustering method

For clustering algorithms, the Analysis Team chose an evidence accumulation clustering (EAC) approach (Fred and Jain 2005) with modifications. It was chosen over more common clustering techniques, such as k-means clustering and hierarchical clustering, for its demonstrated improved ability to identify clusters of arbitrary shapes and sizes. Throughout the blind classification procedure, the Analysis Team clustered cases into two groups based on the similarity of extracted features. For the specific purposes of this study, they made changes to EAC. The modified method was called ‘combination clustering’. See for a comparison; details in Wong and Tsuchiya (2020); see also. Here, we provide only a cursory description of combination clustering.

EAC works by accumulating the results of multiple clusterings—evidence—of the same data. Evidence consists of multiple runs of simpler clustering algorithms, where each may give incomplete but diversified information about similarities in the data. Here, we shall call the producing of pieces of evidence sub-clusterings so as not to confuse them with the hierarchical clustering procedure that follows the evidence accumulation step. In Fred and Jain’s (2005) experiments, the authors implemented sub-clustering using multiple, randomly seeded runs of k-means clustering (MacQueen 1967) and then counted the frequency of co-association between each pair of data points. In the evidence accumulation step, these sub-clustering results were tallied to produce the co-association similarity matrix, upon which they performed evidence accumulation via hierarchical clustering, with either single- or average-linkage criterion (Sokal and Michener 1958). They finally thresholded the linkage distance so as to obtain the natural number of clusters present in the data.

The Analysis Team modified EAC for three reasons. First, unlike in the original EAC, the team knew from the outset that they were dealing with two equal-sized clusters. They therefore modified the final step from finding the natural number of clusters in the data to finding just two clusters. However, especially for noisy data sets, a linkage threshold that produces two clusters often produces ones of asymmetric sizes, wherein the smaller cluster may consist of one or a few outliers. To cope with this problem, the Analysis team chose the highest threshold that produced at least one cluster that is as close to 50% of the cases as possible, and all other clusters were reclassified as belonging to the other class. This forced the clustering results to produce two classes of close-to-equal sizes, where at least one of them was guaranteed to contain cases with similar (i.e. more homogeneous) features; the Analysis team postulated that those may represent dreamless cases, however they classified the clusters based on their features rather than their homogeneity.

Second, as the feature spaces consisted of up to 2475 dimensions (or features), this far exceeded the maximum of 64 dimensions demonstrated by Fred and Jain (2005). To avert a possible curse-of-dimensionality problem (see Bellman 1957), the Analysis team limited the number of considered features for each run to no more than nine at a time. They found that this modification made the method more robust when clustering noisy features in experiments with synthetic data (Wong and Tsuchiya 2020). The clustering ensemble in combination clustering was therefore populated with sub-clusterings based on many different combinations of features.

Third, to give greater weight to more meaningful sub-clusterings during evidence accumulation, the Analysis Team also introduced weighting of sub-clustering results by a goodness-of-clustering metric: the mean silhouette value. [See the method paper by Wong and Tsuchiya (2020) for omitted details about the modifications introduced in combination clustering.]

The combination clustering algorithm consisted of further modifiable subcomponents, including sub-clustering, weighting and hierarchical clustering. We will describe the specific methods used in each step as they appear.


Step 1


Method

The task in the first step of blind classification was to classify the 54 blinded 1-min polysomnograms—referred to as cases—for dreamfulness. Data included simultaneous 25-channel EEG, 2-channel electrooculography (EOG) and 2-channel electromyography (EMG); the channels’ nominal locations were provided. At this step, minimal information was known about the data that could be used for classification. The Analysis Team began with an initial exploration of feature extractions, followed by clustering based on a focussed set of features using the combination clustering method (Wong and Tsuchiya 2020).

First, the Analysis Team considered eight different methods of analysis to obtain features to be used for combination clustering, based on the previous EEG literature on loss of consciousness (e.g. sleep, anaesthesia and brain injury), listed with detailed methods in. These were spectral power at established frequency bands, spectral power at fine frequency resolution, autocorrelation features as described by Thomsen et al. (1991), permutation entropy (Bandt and Pompe 2002; Ouyang 2012), approximate entropy (Pincus 1991; Pincus et al. 1991; Lee 2012), EOG root mean square (RMS) activity, EMG RMS activity and spectral power in temporo-occipito-parietal areas as described by Siclari et al. (2014). (Siclari et al.’s (2014) preprint article contained differences from Siclari et al.’s (2017) article. The Analysis Team utilized the findings reported in the preprint until Step 5, when the print article was finally published in a peer-reviewed journal.) As utilizing too many features would be expected to result in overfitting (Domingos 2012), the Analysis Team aimed to select only a few features best suited for the proper clustering procedure.

In the absence of any ground truth, the Analysis Team sought features that would produce clustering behaviour expected of correct classification of dream report conditions. They operationalized this by how consistently certain features clustered cases when the cases were split into four 15-s time segments. (The concept of consistency as used in this context should only be taken to mean the consistency of the clustering results across time.) Promising features would produce (i) clustering results that were consistent across temporally adjacent segments of time or (ii) results that were increasing in consistency for time segments more proximal to the time of awakening. A consistency metric between the clusterings of any two segments was formulated as follows.

Firstly, let us denote each case as D(i) (where i = 1, 2, …, 54), and divide it into four segments as Dj(i) (where j = 1, 2, 3, 4). Clustering would assign to each Dj(i) a membership label for one of two clusters: c1 and c2. Importantly, these clusters were not classified for dreamfulness; thus, c1 in one segment can correspond to either c1 or c2 in any other segment. But, because we always labelled the data by one of two clusters, there are only two possible ways to map c1 from one segment to c1 from another. Let us denote the proportion of cases that remain in the same cluster between segment m and n under the first and second mappings as π1(m, n) and π2(m, n). Then, the equality π1(m, n) + π2(m, n) = 1 holds for any clustering result. We thus define consistency of clustering between segment m and n as follows: in which C(m, n) takes the value 0 when the clustering is not consistent at all, and 1 for perfect consistency.

The Analysis Team performed clustering on all cases for each time segment separately, and with each of the eight methods of feature extraction. Based on their resulting consistency measures, they chose to classify dreamfulness based on the PowerFine feature set (detailed in) for Step 1.

Briefly, the PowerFine feature set consisted of cases’ power spectral density (PSD) estimates for each EEG electrode, in frequency bins between 0 and 49.5 Hz in 0.5 Hz steps (i.e. 99 features per electrode). The feature set in total had 2475 features for each case (99 × 25 electrodes). Note that PSDs were estimated throughout this study using fast Fourier transform and Welch’s method (Welch 1967) using Hann windows with 80% overlap.

The Analysis Team performed the sub-clustering stage of combination clustering 82 475 times; 2475 sub-clusterings were performed corresponding to each unique feature, and 10 000 random combinations of features were sub-clustered for each number of features k between 2 and 9 inclusively. Based on the result of the above procedure, the Analysis Team contrasted each feature between the two clusters by taking the Cohen’s d effect size (Cohen 1988) of their values after log-transformation. Cohen’s d is calculated as where the term μ1 − μ2 is the difference between the clusters’ means, and σ is their pooled standard deviation. The Analysis Team finally classified the cluster with overall higher low-frequency activity and lower high-frequency activity to be from the dreamless condition, concordant with Siclari et al.'s (2014) findings.


Results

The temporal consistency results are summarized in. The PowerFine candidate feature set exhibited highest consistency (>0.9) for three pairs of consecutive time segments (i.e. 1 vs. 2, 2 vs. 3 and 3 vs. 4). This meant that class memberships of two cases tended to be consistent across four 15-s time segments, despite clustering being performed completely independently across segments. This and three other candidates were found to be significantly consistent following Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons (two-tailed Binomial test, N = 54, unadjusted P ≤ 0.001), including feature sets PermEn, Siclari and EmgRms. With regard to positive trends in temporal consistency within individual participants, only EmgRms exhibited a difference between the temporal consistencies of the first half and last half (one-tailed permutation test, Bonferroni-corrected P = 0.0002).

Using the PowerFine feature set, the Analysis Team performed combination clustering and obtained two clusters with unequal membership numbers (28 vs. 26). The dendrogram in gives a visualization of the separation between the clusters. shows the mean difference in power by Cluster 1 subtracted from Cluster 2, and shows its effect size in Cohen’s d. The Analysis Team observed generally lower high-frequency power (ca. 11–30 Hz) in the average of Cluster 1 compared to Cluster 2 (visible in heat maps). Thus, based on Siclari et al. (2014)’s findings, the Analysis Team interpreted Cluster 1 to contain more dreamless report cases, and Cluster 2 to contain more dreamful ones. (To see the exact case-wise classification for this and all proceeding steps, please refer to.) The Analysis Team submitted this classification, and the Data Team determined the accuracy to be 54%, which was not significantly different from chance according to a two-tailed Binomial test (N = 54, P = 0.68).

The Analysis Team’s clustering turned out to strongly group for participant identity and not for dreamfulness. Although full participant information was not revealed until Step 3, we show them in below the dendrogram by the upper row of coloured lines, whose colours code for each of the nine participants. The fact that clustering strongly grouped for participant identity was nonetheless determinable by the Analysis Team in Step 2: with the revelation of pairing information, it was found that 24 of the 27 pairs of cases were wrongly classified as co-occurring in the same cluster.


Step 2


Method

Together with the announcement of the result for Step 1, the Data Team removed the first layer of blindness by revealing the grouping of the cases into 27 pairs. Each pair consisted of one dreamful and one dreamless case from the same participant. Still employing the combination clustering method, the Analysis Team was guided by a simple formalism of the linear mixed model where the observed data (Cases) should reflect the main effect (Dreamfulness) with added random effects (1 | Participant). Assuming that the main effect of dreamfulness would be constant across participants, the Analysis Team treated the 54 cases as 27 single observations, each with feature values taken as the difference between a given pair. If these assumptions were correct, one can see that successful classification would be obtained through minimization of the variance across paired cases (i.e. alignment of feature vectors along the average difference between the two classes).

Also at this step, the Analysis Team reconsidered the features to use for clustering. In the previous step, their feature set consisted of 2475 features of PSDs across the scalp, which they suspected in hindsight to have been excessively numerous and thus contributed to poor classification performance due to overfitting data (Domingos 2012). They also suspected that the clustering algorithm might have performed better with a more encompassing feature set than one that only looked at EEG. To address these issues, the Analysis Team both condensed the EEG PSD features into a smaller number and expanded the diversity of features that composed the feature set for classification. (See for details.)

In brief, because the spectra across electrodes were apparently similar, the Analysis Team averaged the PSDs across all electrodes in 19 frequency bins that were logarithmically spaced—thus reducing the number of features from 2475 to 19. As for the lost locality information, they delegated this to a focused set of 11 features based on the hot zone findings reported by Siclari et al. (2014), which were accessible as a preprint manuscript at that point in time. These features included the whole-brain power at low- and high-frequency bands, low-frequency parieto-occipital power at various time windows, high-frequency frontal power at various time windows, and high-frequency power at hot zones relating to various perceptual categories. Lastly, the Analysis Team included 20 features extracted from the time course of EMG and EOG, computed differently from Step 1. For each 30-s segment of EMG or EOG, they computed the RMS values of all consecutive 1-s time windows, and took the 0th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 100th percentiles of those as features. This resulted in 10 features (5 percentiles × 2 segments) for each modality. In total, this set consisted of 50 features (19 scalp-average PSD + 11 Siclari features + 10 EMG + 10 EOG).

The difference between each pair was extracted by their subtraction in each feature value after Studentization. Because the Analysis Team did not know which case of the pair belonged to which dream report condition, the polarity of the difference was arbitrarily assigned. As a result, they obtained 27 real-valued vectors in 50 dimensional feature space, whose orientation—and, importantly, not direction—represented the difference between the pairs’ features.

For the combination clustering procedure of this step, sub-clustering was performed on the above-transformed representation of the pairs, as follows. First, the feature space was subsampled to the combination of features to be used by the sub-clustering. shows a mock example where two features were chosen, thus representing the difference vectors (of which there are three, for illustrative purposes) in two dimensions. Next, each vector was centred at their midpoints and normalized to have unity length. A new vector representing the average orientation among all the difference vectors was then found, called the mean orientation vector, which should maximize the mean absolute cosine similarity between each difference vector and itself. Its orientation estimates the true qualitative difference between dreamfulness and dreamlessness. A hyperplane was then drawn normal to this vector, intersecting the origin. This hyperplane splits each difference vector in two, which finally allowed those corresponding cases falling on each side of the hyperplane to be sub-clustered together.

For the goodness-of-clustering values—used to weight each sub-clustering within combination clustering—the Analysis Team took the mean absolute cosine similarity. In order to make these values comparable between sub-clusterings of different dimensionalities, the mean absolute cosine similarity was also divided by the expected value of such if the difference vectors were randomly oriented. This was computed using Monte Carlo simulations, where the number of difference vectors and the dimensionality were matched to those of each sub-clustering.


Results

The Analysis Team obtained two equally sized clusters following the clustering procedure. The dendrogram in gives a visualization of the separation between the clusters. Differences were found in the mean of their features most prominently in EOG activity; the cluster with higher EOG activity (Cluster 1) also had higher EMG activity and low-frequency EEG activity. Differences in Siclari hot zone features were small and otherwise inconsistent. Although major differences were manifest in the EOG and EMG features, the Analysis Team had no rationale based on the literature for using them to determine which cluster corresponded to dreamfulness. Thus, based on EEG differences, they interpreted Cluster 1 to contain more dreamless report cases, and Cluster 2 to contain more dreamful report cases. The Data Team determined the accuracy of this classification to be 59%, which was not significantly different from chance (two-tailed Binomial test, N = 27, P = 0.44). Unlike after Step 1, the Analysis Team did not gain much new information from the feedback on their performance and the newly revealed participant identities.


Step 3


Method

The Data Team removed the second level of blindness with the revelation of cases grouped by common participants. This resulted in nine distinct participant-groups, each associated with six cases, which were composed of three condition-balanced pairs of cases. Given this information, the Analysis Team exploited participant information by removing participant-specific, condition-irrelevant components from the EOG-EEG signals. To this end, they utilized independent component analysis (ICA), a technique for ‘unmixing’ multichannel time series into their underlying, statistically independent time series components (Gävert et al. 2005). They afterwards recomposed the case recordings after selecting and removing the condition-irrelevant components, which might have consisted of artefacts caused by eye and muscle movements. The full details of the methodology are described in S8.

From the recomposed cases of all participants, the Analysis Team extracted the same set of features explained in Step 2 and performed combination clustering on it. A different set of combination clustering sub-clustering procedures was devised to take into account participant information. Taking the method of Step 2’s pair difference vector sub-clustering by mean orientation, the team sub-clustered the cases in four ways. In two of the ways, similar to Step 2, they sub-clustered cases in a pairwise manner: firstly with respect to the mean orientation amongst all pairs, and secondly with respect to the mean orientation of their own participant. The other two ways used the method of Step 1’s k-means sub-clustering and sub-clustered the unpaired cases: firstly amongst all cases, and secondly amongst each participant-group of cases. Therefore, there were four ways in which they performed sub-clustering. gives an overview of the scheme. They calculated the final similarity matrix as the average of these four different sub-clustering methods’ results; the exact details are also described in. The resulting clusters produced with this method were thereafter classified for dreamfulness using the same rationale as in Step 1.


Results

The Analysis Team obtained two equally sized clusters following the clustering procedure, using Ward’s method (Ward 1963) as an alternate hierarchical linkage measurement because the average-linkage method, used in the previous steps, resulted in clusters of uneven sizes, which was undesirable. shows results for this step in the same format as for Step 2. The Analysis Team found differences between the clusters most prominently in EOG activity; the cluster with higher EOG activity (Cluster 2) also had higher EMG activity and low-frequency EEG activity. In contrast, differences in Siclari hot zone features were small (absolute effect size Cohen’s d < 0.7) and otherwise inconsistent with each other in regard to their reported interpretations. Faced with similar results to Step 2, the Analysis Team interpreted Cluster 1 to contain more dreamful report cases (see for exact case-wise classification).

The Data Team determined the accuracy of this classification to be 59%, which was not significantly different from chance (two-tailed Binomial test, N = 27, P = 0.44). This feedback also did not give the Analysis team any further insights into their classification.


Step 4


Method

The third level of blindness was removed by grouping all cases with the same dream report condition from each participant. This effectively gave each participant two unlabelled condition groups of three cases each—referred to as participant-condition groups. The Analysis Team approached classification similarly to Step 3, first removing condition-irrelevant components using ICA with an adjusted component removal procedure, but then taking the difference in features between the average of conditions for each participant as observation vectors. This resulted in nine 50D vectors on which sub-clustering was performed in a pairwise manner. See for full details. Following combination clustering, the team classified the clustering result for dream report conditions according to the rationale set out in Step 1.


Results

reports the results in the same format as in. However, shows the dendrogram of clustering at only the participant level, unlike in, as they were already grouped at this Step. Unlike Steps 2 and 3, the Analysis Team found a prominent difference between the clusters in EMG activity but not EOG activity; the cluster with higher EMG activity (Cluster 1) also had higher low-frequency EEG activity. Differences in Siclari hot zone features also indicated lower frontal high-frequency activity for this cluster, which in their study indicated an absence of dreaming experience. The team thus interpreted Cluster 1 to contain more dreamless report cases and Cluster 2 to contain more dreamful report cases (see for exact case-wise classification). The Data Team determined the accuracy of this classification to be 44%, which was not significantly different from chance performance (two-tailed Binomial test, N = 9, P = 1).


Step 5


Method

The penultimate layer of blindness to be removed was information on the common dream report condition across all cases. This resulted in just two groups—one from the dreamful condition, the other from the dreamless condition—each consisting of 27 cases fully labelled by common participants. No clustering was required. To make their final blind classification, the Analysis Team replicated three measures based on the significant differences reported by Siclari et al. (2017) and Scarpelli et al. (2017), both of which had been published around the time when the Analysis team conducted the Step 5 analysis. (Note that this was the first time the Analysis Team utilized Siclari et al.'s 2017 findings. Previous to this, findings based on the 2014 preprint article were used.) Two of the features were Siclari et al.’s low and high frequency hot zone power, named respectively SBP low and SBP high (SBP for the initials of the first three authors of the Siclari et al. paper), and one feature was the low-frequency activity reported by Scarpelli et al. named Scarpelli (see for full details). The Analysis Team classified these condition groups for dream report condition based on the group-average of these features.


Results

The difference in feature means after removing inter-participant variability is shown in. All features had low effect sizes (absolute Cohen’s d < 0.4). As they were consistent in their indication of dream report condition, the Analysis Team interpreted Cluster 1 to contain more dreamless report cases and Cluster 2 to contain more dreamful report cases (see for exact case-wise classification). The Data Team determined this classification to be inaccurate.


Discussion

The Dream Catcher test is a paradigm to examine whether an understanding of the neural constituents of consciousness (i.e. experiences) is indeed genuine, by separating the measurement of brain activity from associated subjective reports. The test should be performed under the stipulation that the full contents of consciousness are generated internally by neural mechanisms operating spontaneously and independently of external stimulation. If a scientist can reliably reconstruct the full contents of consciousness based only on observations of the neural activity and without access to information on external stimuli or subjective reports, then the test is passed.

We executed a simplified version of the Dream Catcher test with data from nine participants, collected by the Data Team with an early night serial-awakening paradigm. The Analysis Team’s task was to sort the EEG segments (i.e. 60-s PSGs preceding awakenings and interviews) into two groups: segments associated with dream reports vs. segments associated with reports of non-dreaming. The Data Team evaluated the Analysis Team’s performance over five iterations with gradual removal of blindness. They were: (i) all cases unlabelled, (ii) cases paired by complementary dreamfulness conditions from the same participant, (iii) cases labelled by common participant, (iv) cases labelled by common dreamfulness condition and participant and (v) cases labelled by common dreamfulness condition. The Analysis Team approached the classification task by clustering together quantitatively similar cases into two groups and then manually classifying those groups based on findings from the recent literature. The similarity metrics used in clustering were based on features extracted from power and location of EEG spectra, and EMG and EOG activity.

At all levels of blindness, the Analysis Team was unable to correctly classify between dreamfulness vs. dreamlessness with statistically significant accuracy; the best performance was achieved at Steps 2 and 3 with an accuracy of 59% (P = 0.44). Thus, the Analysis Team did not pass even this rudimentary form of the Dream Catcher test.


Possible explanations of the results

The results from this Dream Catcher experiment suggest that the neural correlates of dreaming consciousness, reportedly found in the power spectra of the brain, may not be robust enough to be useful in blind classification, such as attempted here. Due to the challenging nature of our experimental setup, our failure to pass the Dream Catcher test was not in itself a surprising outcome. However, the failure to predict dreamfulness based on the findings of several past studies—particularly at Step 5 where the choice was binary—is an interesting result. We explore several possible explanations for the poor performance.

First, there were several methodological differences between the original studies, which we have referred to, and ours. We had fewer participants than Chellappa et al. (N = 17), Esposito et al. (N = 11), Siclari et al. (N = 32), Scarpelli et al. (N = 14), and Siclari et al. (N = 12), which exposed us to a greater risk of false negative results. Monte Carlo simulations show that our sample size should have allowed us to detect an effect of size of d ≥ 1.3 with at least 1 − β = 0.8 statistical power and α = 0.05 false positive rate for one-tailed t-tests of N = 9 paired, Gaussian-distributed samples. We recommend that future investigations rely on larger samples in order to properly confirm or disconfirm the findings in our study.

On the technical level, Siclari et al.’s (2017) sleep study differed from ours. Whereas they used a 256-channel high-density EEG system, we were limited to a 29-channel system; and instead of dipole current source modelling, we used Perrin’s method of estimating scalp current source density by taking the Laplacian of fitted spherical splines (Perrin et al. 1989). Our emulation of Siclari et al.’s hot zone measurements was therefore less precise. Our data were similar to Scarpelli et al.’s sleep study: they used 28 scalp electrodes with unipolar referencing for their analysis. Esposito et al.’s study used fewer yet: 19 electrodes with unipolar referencing.

Another explanation for our results might have to do with extraneous variability in our data. Clustering works by grouping data according to their relative positions in feature space, but if these positions are influenced more by irrelevant factors or random noise than the relevant effect, then clustering would produce noisy or incorrect results. This was readily apparent from the result of Step 1, where clustering in fact grouped cases together by participant identity and not by dreamfulness. However, even though participant identities were balanced from Step 2 onwards using pairing information, the classification accuracy did not significantly improve. This remained true even after removing independent components from the EEG time series that clustered contrarily to pairing and participant information in Steps 3 and 4. If our analysis failed to find an effect due to the presence of irrelevant factors or noise, it is unlikely due to only inter-participant variability. Assuming that an effect does exist, we would require a larger sample size to measure it.

Lastly, most of the previous studies did not control for complexity of dream reports, but pooled reports varying in complexity into a single group, and even possibly combined dream reports from different times of night without explicit stratified sampling. Such paradigms might confound the neural correlates of dreaming with time-of-night effects (Pivik and Foulkes 1968; Casagrande et al. 1996). We defined dreams as any experiences occurring during sleep—an extremely simple and broad definition in comparison to more fine-grained conceptual frameworks of sleep experience (see Windt et al. 2016). In our study, all NREM sleep dreams were static (i.e. lacking change or temporal progression), whilst other studies might have treated only complex, dynamic and temporally progressing experiences as genuine instances of dreaming. It is possible that we failed to classify dreamful and dreamless NREM episodes or find similar patterns of results as in previous studies due to differences in how each study defined dreaming and its subtypes. Chellappa et al. (2011) asked participants ‘How much did you dream?’ and identified a given report as dreamful when the answer was ‘greatly’, ‘fairly’ or ‘little’, likely including both static and dynamic dream reports in the study sample. Siclari et al. (2017) categorized both perceptual and non-perceptual mentation reports as cases of dreaming as long as participants ‘had been experiencing anything’. Scarpelli et al. (2017) selected dreams with narrative and temporal properties (Foulkes and Schmidt 1983) and disregarded dreams without recall. On the other hand, dreamless sleep was identified similarly by all these studies as reports of having no experience. Because the Data Team utilized the early night serial-awakening paradigm to selectively target static NREM dreams, this allowed them to reduce the confounds of varying complexity and time-of-night, while retaining the smallest critical difference between no experience and having a minimal degree of experience (i.e. a static dream). Potentially, compared to previous studies, the observable neural difference that could be expected may be much more subtle in our design: that is, the difference between dreamless and dreamful NREM sleep when dreams were limited to static levels of complexity in the early night.

It is theoretically conceivable that we have experiences all the time during sleep, and that reports of dreamless sleep merely reflect the occasional inability to recall these experiences. However, as long as we need to rely on subjective recollections of experiences, there is no reliable empirical test to verify whether reports of non-dreaming reflect a failure to recall previous experience or a truly unconscious state. This is a potential problem that would equally affect all existing studies of the neural correlates of dreaming.


The relation between dreamfulness and the depth of NREM sleep

Slow waves have been proposed as a possible neural mechanism underlying the suppression of dream experience across sleep stages. During a slow wave event, neuronal populations undergo bistable states, which can impede inter-areal communication of the brain (Pigorini et al. 2015). This has then been suggested to lead to the disruption of conscious dream experiences, thus producing dreamlessness (Tononi et al. 2016).

Even though a number of studies have reported that NREM sleep dreaming is associated with a decrease of delta power over differing locations in the brain (Esposito et al. 2004; Chellappa et al. 2011; Siclari et al. 2014), we were unable to support this finding. While it could be due to an unidentified confound in our experimental design, data or analysis, it is also possible that a relative delta power decrease is not a necessary correlate of dreaming. We propose another possible explanation: that delta power may simply reflect the depth of NREM sleep—itself defined by the relative power of slow waves—rather than dreaming consciousness per se.

NREM Stages 2, 3 and 4 have been classically delineated by the proportion of visually observable delta waves within the course of a 20- or 30-s epoch (Rechtschaffen and Kales 1968). Stage 2 sleep was primarily defined by the presence of sleep spindles and up to 20% prevalence of delta waves; Stage 3 sleep was defined for having 20–50% delta waves; and epochs with >50% delta waves were scored as Stage 4 sleep. Even by these definitions, there is a huge variance in the amount of delta waves not only between sleep stages but also within a given NREM stage. This has become even more amplified by the newer sleep scoring guidelines introduced by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (Iber et al. 2007) with the merging of NREM Stages 3 and 4 into the N3 stage of ‘slow wave sleep’. In this new classification system, Stage N3 no longer reflects the depth of sleep within that particular sleep stage, as delta waves can occur for 20–100% of the duration of an epoch.

Importantly, dream recall is already known to decrease from Stage 2 to Stage 3 and subsequently from former Stage 3 to Stage 4 (Pivik and Foulkes 1968; Pivik 1971; Foulkes 1982; Moffitt 1982; Noreika et al. 2009). As these stages were delineated by the amount of delta waves, it is plausible that the link made by the recent studies between dream recall and delta power in fact reflects the older link between dream recall and NREM depth as defined by the progressive substages of NREM sleep. Previous studies, as well as ours, have utilized sleep stage classification as a measure of sleep depth. While most studies controlled for sleep stages in conjunction with dreamful and dreamless reports, they did not control for the variance of SWA within a sleep stage. Thus, the previously reported association between dreaming and EEG delta power may reflect a simple correlation between dream recall and the depth of NREM sleep as defined by the range of SWA that characterizes each sleep stage rather than intrinsic neural mechanisms of dreaming. This might present an explanation for why we were unable to discriminate between dream report conditions when the distribution of NREM sleep depth (as defined by the proportion of delta waves) was minimized.

As an example, Siclari et al. (2017) were able to predict dream recall in real time by awakening participants once delta power decreased below an individual threshold (in addition to a gamma increase). We could argue that such awakenings in fact yielded dream reports that took place during relatively shallow NREM sleep, in which case we would already expect to have more reports of dreaming. Such an uneven association between the presence of dream experience and the depth of sleep, even within a given NREM sleep stage, is possible when all reports of dreaming and dreamless sleep from the same sleep stage are used for EEG analysis. In our study, the confounding factor of sleep stage (or depth) was minimized by using only a small, matched subsample of data (N = 27 + 27) from a larger pool of awakenings (N = 294), and making sure we had equal numbers of Stage 2 and 3 sleep epochs in dreamful and dreamless conditions from the same participant. Further, in our data, the time from the onset of sleep to the first awakening as well as the time spent in a specific sleep stage before awakening were similar between dreamless and dreamful conditions. Assuming that these parameters are highly correlated with the proportion of SWA, the above control measures increased the likelihood that SWA was similar between our dreamful and dreamless epochs [and notably, the proportion of dreamless vs. dreamful reports did not statistically differ in stages N2 or N3 (Noreika et al. 2009)]. The reduced possible bias in sleep depth distribution between the conditions neutralized the low-frequency effect and might explain why dreamful vs. dreamless conditions in our sample did not differ regarding low-frequency power.

In addition, we previously found no spectral power difference between earlier and later awakenings during the three to four hour data collection period (Noreika et al. 2009). It seemed that either early night sleep within an approximately 3- to 4-h duration of continuous recording time was too short to produce the ‘time of night’ effect of sleep EEG, or that awakenings during early night sleep prevented the normal change from taking place. This suggests that variance in sleep depth as a function of time of the night is unlikely to bias our data. In this regard, the collection of the data only during the first few hours of sleep may be considered an improvement over studies where time-of-night effects (on dream recall or SWA) were not controlled for.

In sum, we proffer that the above mentioned factors might explain why our analyses failed to predict dreamfulness based on low frequency power and that a much larger and significant bias can be expected in studies with less stringent timing of awakenings and longer sessions throughout the night. Our failure also offers the opportunity to speculate on the possibility that delta power decrease may be interpreted as a confound as opposed to true marker of dreaming.


Pros and cons of the Dream Catcher paradigm

We have found, through the course of our experiment, that the constraints imposed by the Dream Catcher paradigm force the researchers to focus their efforts on a single determination of the data. This mindset is considerably different to the status quo of scientific research nowadays, where one can pursue multiple avenues of investigation, sequentially or simultaneously, and then deal no further with those yielding non-supporting results. Those failed avenues of investigation end up being incompletely explained and typically remain unpublished. By contrast, the Dream Catcher test permits investigating only a single avenue, and the researchers must address its results whether they support the hypothesis or not. It is similar in spirit to the Registered Reports format for science publishing (see Chambers 2013 for an exposition). In addition, blinding the data removes bias by the researchers; unlike in common practice, where the results are always known, researchers that theoretically pass the Dream Catcher test would do so blindly and based on genuine understanding of the neural constituents of consciousness. The Dream Catcher paradigm encourages not only good science but also a critical assessment of the reliability of past findings.

This paradigm is not, however, without costs. Compared to the testing of multiple hypotheses, the data for a Dream Catcher test—in principle—can only be used once per hypothesis, which is relatively inefficient. Even if there were multiple Analysis Teams working in parallel, there would be no way to ensure that they each tested different hypotheses—because any such attempt would undermine the independence of the teams and could reintroduce bias. We addressed this inefficiency problem somewhat in our design by re-evaluating performance iteratively with a gradual removal of blindness. We hoped this would give us insights into the level of information required for successful classification.

Following the completion of this experiment, we once again address the inefficiency problem and propose that multiple hypotheses could be validly tested within this paradigm through the use of unsupervised machine learning algorithms; for example, by setting up separate algorithms to test each hypothesis and disregard information that might otherwise produce experimenter bias. In our study, we started with the assessment of several families of features for clustering consistency, but ultimately submitted our answers based on just one of them. If we had allowed for the submission of multiple answers in parallel for each set of features, we would have been able to broaden the scope of our study. The caveat, however, is that once again the researchers may be tempted to neglect non-supporting results at the next step.


Future avenues of investigation

The data analysed here constitute only a portion of the total number of awakenings (294) performed and recorded in our sleep study. Now that we have completed the Dream Catcher experiment with all its self-imposed restrictions, we can further investigate the findings of past studies with the data we did not include. This may well reveal that those unsupported effects do in fact exist, but that they did not survive our precursory data selection process. At the time of the submission of this article, we have preregistered an analysis plan for the remaining data of our study, making explicit hypotheses based on the effects that the previous studies have reported.

Additionally, we can check more speculative effects reported in past studies using our expanded data set. Contemporary theories of consciousness suggest that connectivity (or integration) in the brain is necessary for the emergence of consciousness. The past studies reporting low frequency effects did not consider such features; all their features were measures of univariate data, operating on only one channel at a time. To measure connectivity, we must employ features that operate on multivariate data. Phase coherence and cross-correlation, as we have mentioned in the introduction, are well-known examples. More sophisticated measures have been proposed for quantifying consciousness (Barrett and Seth 2011; Schartner et al. 2015; Oizumi et al.2016a,b; Tegmark 2016; Kim et al. 2018), taking inspiration from the integrated information theory of consciousness (Tononi, 2004, Oizumi et al. 2014). These measures are all necessarily multivariate in nature. It is possible that the true correlates of dreaming consciousness in NREM sleep are to be found in multivariate features rather than univariate ones. We intend to investigate this possibility in future work.


Authors’ contributions

Original idea of the Dream Catcher paradigm: A.R. Original design of the experiment: V.N., A.R., K.V. Experimental data collection: V.N., K.V. Dream content analysis design and sleep stage scoring: V.N., K.V. Data blinding: L.M. Experimental analysis design: W.W., J.W., N.T. PSG data analysis: W.W. First draft prepared by W.W. V.N., A.R., J.W., K.V., N.T. contributed to revision.


Seeing objects improves our hearing of the sounds they make

Kingson Man, Gabriela Melo, Antonio Damasio, Jonas Kaplan — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7415264, CC BY 4.0.

It has been established that lip reading improves the perception of auditory speech. But does seeing objects themselves help us hear better the sounds they make? Here we report a series of psychophysical experiments in humans showing that the visual enhancement of auditory sensitivity is not confined to speech. We further show that the crossmodal enhancement was associated with the conscious visualization of the stimulus: we can better hear the sounds an object makes when we are conscious of seeing that object. Our work extends an intriguing crossmodal effect, previously circumscribed to speech, to a wider domain of real-world objects, and suggests that consciousness contributes to this effect.

Keywords: multisensory integration, binding, imagery, psychophysics


Introduction

Can seeing an object help us to hear better the sound that object makes? The answer might be yes, given that we can detect speech sounds more sensitively when we watch a speaker’s articulatory movements—when we lip read—especially in noisy environments (Grant and Seitz 2000; Bernstein et al. 2004). To date, however, visual enhancement of auditory sensitivity has only been demonstrated for linguistic objects, and there are reasons to believe that this crossmodal effect might be narrowly circumscribed. Audiovisual speech is regarded as a “special” class of stimulus and presumed to be processed in a privileged mode—i.e. there are behavioral advantages for recognizing speech stimuli as such (Tuomainen et al. 2005; Vatakis et al. 2008). It is not known if this remarkable crossmodal effect respects the hard boundary of linguistic objects or if it generalizes to a wider domain of natural objects.

There is a deep literature on the crossmodal interactions between simple tones and flashes of light. For these elementary audiovisual events, there is ample evidence of both crossmodal facilitation, in which a flash helps to detect a beep (e.g. Child and Wendt 1938; Schirillo 2011) and interference, in which a flash interferes with processing tones (e.g. Colavita 1974; Fassnidge et al. 2017). By comparison, material objects draw on semantic knowledge and permit much richer spectral and temporal crossmodal interchange than do beeps and flashes.

Here we report a psychophysical investigation into visual enhancement of auditory sensitivity, explicitly targeting objects that produce sounds other than speech. Under a variety of visual co-stimulation conditions, we estimated auditory detection thresholds with unbiased two-interval forced choice (2IFC) procedures. In a first study, we compared auditory thresholds obtained while subjects viewed a static fixation cross, with thresholds obtained while subjects viewed a video of the object. We also tested whether any enhancement provided by the object video was due to a reduction in temporal uncertainty (Tjan et al. 2014).

In a preregistered second study, we sought to replicate and extend the findings from the first. We performed a more stringent dissection of the temporal information provided by the object video, generating an abstract visualizer stimulus to provide fine temporal information with a minimum of object-related semantic information.

The binding together of sensory modalities is a critical feature of conscious experience. Accordingly, we also tested the dependence of crossmodal enhancement on conscious vision. Would the videos need to be consciously seen for auditory enhancement to occur? We manipulated conscious visibility with dichoptic presentation. Auditory thresholds were compared when subjects consciously saw the object video, and when the object video was rendered unconscious with continuous flash suppression (CFS, Tsuchiya and Koch 2005) or binocular rivalry (BR).


Methods and Materials


Study 1


Participants

We recruited 18 subjects from the community of the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Subjects were adults with self-reported normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Subjects received no monetary compensation for their participation, following local regulations. Approval for research involving human subjects was obtained from the Brazilian Ministry of Health’s Ethics Commission and the Institutional Review Board of the University of Southern California.


Stimuli

Two sound-producing objects were used, a musical triangle and a tambourine. Audiovisual recordings of the objects generating sounds were made with a digital camera (Olympus E-P2). A set of sound stimuli and silent video stimuli was extracted from the recordings. All were truncated to 2 s.

The two other visual stimuli were a fixation cross and an onset cue. The onset cue was a fixation cross that shifted its color from white to red to white, in time with the onset and offset of the auditory signal.

All stimuli were presented in a light- and sound-attenuated testing chamber. Videos were displayed on a 14″ Dell monitor (60 Hz refresh rate), at a viewing distance of 40 cm. Sounds were played over Sennheiser HD-202 headphones driven by a Macbook laptop. Stimulus presentation was precisely controlled with Psychtoolbox (Version 3.0.10) (Brainard 1997) in Matlab (R2015b). Subjects individually adjusted volume levels to one that they would be comfortable with over long-duration testing. Subjects were familiarized with the audiovisual object stimuli by viewing them on a loop for 1 min.

We used a 2IFC task. Each trial contained two intervals of sound, one containing Gaussian white noise, the other containing the same noise sample with an additive acoustic signal. Noise duration was 4 s and signal duration was 2 s; signal onset was randomly placed between 1 and 2 s after noise onset. The stereo signal was averaged across L/R channels. To reduce temporal cueing by sudden sound onset/offset (auditory attack and release), the auditory signal was linearly faded in and out over 500 ms each.


Procedure

For each 2IFC trial the subjects indicated which interval contained the auditory signal. We adaptively estimated the threshold signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for detection of an auditory signal embedded in noise. Noise level, set by each subject, was held constant; signal RMS power was varied to target 70.7% accuracy using the transformed up-down procedure (Levitt 1971) with a two-down one-up rule. The initial trial was presented at 0 dB SNR, with step sizes diminishing on the following schedule: 3 dB to Reversal (R) #2, 1 dB to R5, 0.5 dB to R8, 0.25 dB to R10, and 0.1 dB to R13. Threshold was calculated as the mean of the final 10 reversals.

The order of presentation of objects was counterbalanced across subjects. Thresholds were measured for the fixation cross condition, then the onset cue condition, and finally the object video condition.


Statistical analysis

We hypothesized that auditory thresholds would be lower when viewing some stimuli over others. Specifically, we tested the following directional hypotheses:

Object video < Fixation cross.

Object video < Onset cue.

Onset cue < Fixation cross.

We calculated the likelihood of obtaining differences across conditions greater than the ones observed, in an empirical distribution of values obtained under the null hypothesis (see Siegel and Castellan 1956). Under the null, visual conditions do not affect auditory threshold values and so may be freely permuted. Each subject’s thresholds were randomly reassigned among visual conditions 10,000 times, each time calculating the group average difference between visual conditions. For example, under Hypothesis 1, we randomly (with probability 0.5) swapped the thresholds measured when a subject viewed the object video and when a subject viewed the fixation cross. This was done for each subject and then the group average difference between the two conditions was calculated. This constituted one permutation of the experimental data. This procedure was repeated 10,000 times to build a null distribution of group average differences. Finally, the group average difference was calculated for the original, unswapped data. The P-value was calculated as the proportion of values in the null distribution equal to or greater than the value for the unpermuted data. This permutation procedure permits group-level inference without relying on assumptions of the shape of the distribution of thresholds, or of equal variance among subjects. We omit summary statistics of variation in favor of plots of individual-level data that illustrate the total observed variation.

P-values for all pairwise t-tests were corrected for multiple comparisons by holding the false discovery rate below 5% (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). For nonsignificant results, we calculate the Bayes factor (Dienes 2014; using the calculator by Singh at https://medstats.github.io/bayesfactor.html). This determines the extent to which the data either support the null hypothesis or are instead not sensitive enough to distinguish between hypotheses. We apply the small sample size correction to SEM and use a uniform distribution between 0 and 5.

In a supplementary analysis, we used permutation methods to perform a repeated measures factorial ANOVA using the permuco package in R (Frossard and Renaud 2018; based on theory by Kherad-Pajouh and Renaud 2014). We modeled the effect of two factors, object type (containing the levels triangle and tambourine) and visual cue condition (containing the levels fixation cross, onset cue, and object video), on auditory threshold. All combinations of object type and visual cue were measured in each subject. This tested for an effect of object type on auditory thresholds, as well as for an interaction between object types and visual cue conditions on auditory thresholds.


Study 2

In a preregistered second study, we used the Psi method of Bayesian adaptive estimation of psychometric thresholds (Kontsevich and Tyler 1999) and repeated testing of subjects (15 h over 5 days). The study plan, stimuli, scripts, and data may be freely accessed at the OSF project page: https://osf.io/8fyb2/. All comparisons in Study 2, with the exception of those labeled exploratory, were specified in the preregistration.


Participants

Subjects were recruited as above. Our sample size (n = 9) was informed by a prospective power analysis based on the effect size observed in Experiment 1 (Cohen’s d = 1.13). Setting alpha = 0.05 and power = 0.8, we required at least seven subjects. We recruited 10 subjects (including one of the authors, G.M.). One of the subjects dropped out, for an effective enrollment of nine.


Stimuli

The same object stimuli were used as above, though presented at a shorter duration of 1 s embedded within a 2-s noise interval, with signal onset randomly chosen between 0.5 and 1 s after noise onset. The signal was linearly faded in and out over 200 ms each.

A visualizer cue was created by using the amplitude envelope of the object sound to modulate the size of a circle, following Maddox et al. (2015). The auditory signal was passed through a zero-lag, fifth order, 60 Hz lowpass Butterworth filter, using the Matlab functions butter and filtfilt.

For dichoptic visual stimulus presentation, we used a head-mounted display consisting of a smartphone (Motorola G4, 5.5″ screen) placed in a TT-VR003 3D VR Headset (TaoTronics). The left and right halves of the screen were exclusively displayed to the left and right eyes. The smartphone screen was controlled as an external display with the TwomonUSB Android App (Easy&Light Software).

A CFS stimulus was created by rapidly translating and overlaying rectangles of random colors and sizes at ∼10 Hz (modified from http://martin-hebart.de/webpages/code/stimuli.html). A CFS stimulus of 120 s duration was pregenerated, from which 2 s segments were randomly extracted. We verified that the head-mounted display and software driver was capable of reproducing visual stimuli with correct timings by filming the display and counting frames, yielding a lower bound of 40 display updates per second.

Adapting the strategy of presenting dichoptically unbalanced stimuli in CFS, we exerted strong control of perceptual dominance during BR by presenting one object video to the subject’s dominant eye and at greater contrast, and the other object video to the nondominant eye at lower (5% luminance) contrast. The “dominant” object video was either congruent or incongruent with the sound. The following types of dichoptic visual stimuli were created:

Monocular object: blank in the dominant eye, low-contrast object in the other.

CFS-masked objects: CFS in the dominant eye, low-contrast object in the other.

BR: high-contrast object in the dominant eye, low-contrast object in the other.


Procedure

Five repetitions of the thresholding procedure were performed, resulting in 15 h of psychophysical testing over 5 days for each subject. Subjects became familiarized with the audiovisual stimuli by viewing them on a loop for 1 min. The subject’s dominant eye was determined using a hole-in-card test (Handa et al. 2004). An initial auditory threshold was coarsely estimated with a one-down one-up adaptive procedure and constant step size of 1 dB for six reversals. This provided the Bayesian prior for the main thresholding procedure using the Psi method implemented in the Palamedes Toolbox (Prins and Kingdom 2009). Due to a software bug omitting the final (45th) trial from ∼10% of experimental sessions, we excluded it from all sessions and took the thresholds after 44 trials. Over the five repetitions of each thresholding session, a total of 220 trials contributed to each threshold estimate.

On each day of testing, auditory thresholds were estimated for both objects under the following free-viewing visual conditions: static fixation cross; congruent object video; amplitude envelope visualizer; and CFS. After a rest, auditory thresholds were taken with dichoptic visual presentation of the following conditions: monocular congruent object; monocular incongruent object; CFS of the congruent object; BR with congruent object dominant; and BR with incongruent object dominant. In CFS and BR conditions, subjects reported whether they could see the masked/nondominant stimulus after each trial. Subjects were instructed to set a liberal criterion and report seeing the lower contrast object if any of its features could be clearly seen and if visibility of the higher contrast object was at all impaired. If the masked stimulus was reported as seen, the trial was repeated. This occurred in 2% of CFS/BR trials.

On the final day, subjects rated the two object stimuli for their auditory and visual vividness. They also completed the Adapted Betts QMI Vividness of Imagery Scale (Sheehan 1967).


Statistical analysis

We performed permutation testing as above. Each day’s thresholds were entered into comparisons and permuted, but comparisons were never permuted across days. We also tested for a correlation between individuals’ vividness of sensory imagery and the magnitude of their crossmodal enhancement. Enhancement was calculated as the difference between auditory thresholds measured when viewing the fixation cross and when viewing the object video. We calculated the Pearson correlations between the auditory imagery subscale and enhancement, and between the visual imagery subscale and enhancement.

In a supplementary analysis that was not preregistered, we ran a repeated measures factorial ANOVA with permutation testing as for Study 1 above, but with the difference that Study 2 involved five repeated measures of all conditions within each subject. In addition to the preregistered pairwise comparisons of the visual cue conditions, we tested for an effect of object type on auditory thresholds, as well as for an interaction between object type with visual cue condition on auditory thresholds. We performed two separate ANOVAs, one for the free-viewing conditions and one for the dichoptic viewing conditions.


Results


Study 1

There was a significant main effect of visual cue on auditory threshold (F2, 34 = 17.1, P = 0.0001). Below, we report the results of planned pairwise comparisons among the visual cues. There was a significant main effect of object type on auditory threshold (F1, 17 = 81.2; permutation P = 0.0001), with the triangle sound detected at lower thresholds than the tambourine sound. There was no significant interaction between object type and visual cue (F2, 34 = 0.54, P = 0.59).


Object video vs. fixation

We found subject-wise improvement in auditory sensitivity (reduced detection thresholds) with co-presentation of object videos, as compared to co-presentation of a static fixation cross (mean reductions of 2.04 and 2.21 dB SNR for the triangle and the tambourine, respectively; false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted permutation P-values = 0.026 and 0.003).


Onset cue vs. fixation

We found a mixed pattern of auditory improvement by the co-presentation of a timing cue, as compared to presentation of a fixation cross alone. The timing cue significantly improved detection of the triangle sound (mean reduction of 1.2 dB SNR; P = 0.048), but did not significantly improve detection of the tambourine sound (mean reduction of 0.58 dB SNR; P = 0.051; Bayes factor B = 0.6).


Object video vs. onset cue

For both objects, co-presentation of the object videos improved auditory sensitivity, as compared to the timing cues (mean improvement of 0.86 and 1.63 dB SNR for triangle and tambourine, respectively; P = 0.038 and 0.003).


Study 2: Free-viewing

In the free-viewing conditions, there was a significant main effect of visual cue on auditory threshold (F2, 88 = 13.3, P = 0.0001). Below, we report the results of planned pairwise comparisons among the visual cues. There was a significant main effect of object type on auditory threshold (F1, 44 = 658.9; P = 0.0001), with the triangle sound detected at lower thresholds than the tambourine sound. There was no significant interaction between object type and visual cue (F2, 88 = 2.01, P = 0.14). See for the results of all planned comparisons stated in our pre-registration.


Object video vs. fixation

We replicated the main finding from our first study: for both objects, co-presentation of an object video resulted in higher auditory sensitivity (lower thresholds) than co-presentation of a static fixation cross (mean reductions of 0.81 and 0.65 dB SNR for triangle and tambourine, respectively; FDR-adjusted permutation Ps = 0.0005 for both objects).


Visualizer vs. fixation

Once again, we found a mixed pattern of auditory enhancement by a visual temporal cue. Auditory sensitivity was significantly higher for detection of the triangle sound when accompanied by the visualizer (mean reduction of 0.87 dB SNR; P = 0.0017), but not for the tambourine sound (mean reduction of 0.29 dB SNR; P = 0.09; B = 0.219).


Object video vs. visualizer

For the triangle, the object video did not significantly enhance auditory sensitivity in comparison to the visualizer (increase in thresholds of 0.05 db SNR; P = 0.59; B = 0.09). However, for the tambourine, the object video yielded significantly lower auditory thresholds than did the visualizer (0.36 dB SNR mean reduction; P = 0.017).


Correlation between vividness of imagery and sensitivity enhancement

There were no significant subject-wise correlations between vividness of sensory imagery and magnitudes of crossmodal enhancement. The correlation between crossmodal enhancement and vividness of auditory imagery was r = 0.62 (t = 2.09, df = 7, P = 0.08). The correlation between crossmodal enhancement and vividness of visual imagery was r = 0.15 (t = 0.4, df = 7, P = 0.7).


Study 2: Dichoptic Viewing

Under dichoptic viewing, there was a significant main effect of object type on auditory threshold (F1, 44 = 665; P = 0.0001), with the triangle sound detected at lower thresholds than the tambourine sound. There was a significant main effect of visual cue, across the four types of dichoptically presented stimuli, on auditory threshold (F3, 132 = 6.1, P = 0.0005). Below, we report the results of planned pairwise comparisons among the visual cues. There was no significant interaction between object type and visual cue (F3, 132 = 1.1, P = 0.3460).


Masking the object video from consciousness with CFS

Auditory detection thresholds for the triangle were not significantly modulated by CFS (top left; mean increase of 0.02 dB SNR; P = 0.5; B = 0.18). However, auditory thresholds for the tambourine were significantly higher when its video was masked by CFS (top right; 0.47 dB SNR mean reduction; P = 0.006).


Consciously seeing the congruent, vs. the incongruent, object under BR

This comparison was a follow-on, exploratory analysis not anticipated in our preregistration. The dominant object was reported to be in exclusive visual awareness in 98% of BR trials. For both sounds, auditory thresholds were lower when the congruent object was consciously visible than when the incongruent object was consciously visible (bottom; mean reductions of 0.69 and 0.44 dB SNR for triangle and tambourine, respectively; P = 0.003 and 0.024).


Discussion

Our results demonstrate the equivalent of lip reading for nonlinguistic objects. Seeing an object helps us better hear the sound that the object makes. The observed magnitudes of visual enhancement for hearing object sounds (0.65–2.21 dB SNR) were comparable to those previously reported for improvement in hearing speech sounds (0.8–2.2 dB SNR; Grant and Seitz 2000). This improvement was not fully accounted for by the coarse or fine temporal information provided by abstract visual cues. Visual cues were more effective when they were consciously experienced than when they were presented to the eyes but not “seen.” When both object videos were presented, one to each eye, subjects were more sensitive to hearing an object’s sound if they consciously saw the congruent object. When an object video was abolished from consciousness using CFS, only the tambourine’s thresholds were affected. One possible explanation for this discrepancy between the manipulations of visual consciousness is the ∼10-fold greater depth of ocular suppression achieved by CFS compared to BR (Tsuchiya et al. 2006).


Hearing better, not quicker

Our findings of auditory threshold reduction demonstrate the enhancement of hearing itself, and not the enhanced performance of a behavior informed by hearing. An example of behavioral enhancement is a reduction in reaction times with multimodal stimulation. For object recognition, it is known that co-presentation of an object’s sound and image can reduce reaction times compared to presentation in one modality alone, or presentation of incongruent objects across the modalities (Giard and Peronnet 1999; Molholm et al. 2004; Suied et al. 2009). But speeded reaction times do not necessarily reflect increased sensitivity. One may be quicker to report recognition of an object due to the summation of multimodal information, rather than the enhancement of one modality by the other.

Crossmodal improvements in reaction time and accuracy have also been observed when identifying objects specifically by their sounds (Schneider et al., 2008; Yuval-Greenberg and Deouell, 2009; Masakura et al., 2016). The effect may be long-lasting, as prior study of visual objects primes later identification of their sounds (Greene et al. 2001). However, these patterns of results can be explained by a visually mediated shift of an auditory criterion. A person might be quicker to report hearing a dog’s bark when primed with a picture of a dog, not necessarily because the bark sounds any clearer, but because they are more inclined to ascribe barking to the same noisy sound.

We show, in the 2IFC object detection setting, a basic, sensory-level improvement of hearing by seeing. Our experimental dissection of temporal information from the visual cue reveals the effect is at least partially mediated by semantic knowledge. We speculate that the mixed results from the two objects are due to an object- or event-dependence of the effect. Different objects have different levels of emphasis on their semantic content. Some objects may rely more on timing cues (e.g. our triangle) and others on semantics (e.g. our tambourine) for their crossmodal enhancement. Language objects are especially well-differentiated by their crossmodal semantics (though they are perhaps “not that special” after all, see Vroomen and Stekelenburg 2011). At the other end, the minimal audiovisual events of beeps and flashes may rely more on the structural aspects of temporal and spatial coincidence.

With respect to distinguishing sounds by their structural properties, the stationarity, or consistency, of a sound may play a role in its detection in noise. A recent study generated the illusion of hearing sound textures during several seconds of pure white noise (McWalter and McDermott 2019). The strength of the illusion was modulated by the stationarity of the sound; pure noise was more frequently mistaken, e.g., for applause (stationary) than for firecrackers (nonstationary). Future studies could test whether nonstationary sounds, being less amenable to statistical completion, would benefit more from the addition of a crossmodal cue.


Imagery or attention?

An object-based visual cue provides rich temporal and semantic information that can automatically draw auditory attention (Molholm et al. 2007), and/or evoke a precisely specified auditory image. The question arises if one or the other mechanism is responsible for crossmodal enhancement. In the intramodal case, auditory imagery has been shown to enhance auditory sensitivity in a stimulus-selective manner (Farah and Smith 1983). A later study showed that auditory imagery can also selectively interfere with auditory detection (Okada and Matsuoka 1992). This argues that imagery, rather than attention, may be their operative mechanism. Imagery can become a competitor to the stimulus, whereas the recruitment of attention would not be expected to impair detection.

Earlier studies of auditory imagery have shown a Perky effect, where internal imagery is mistaken for an external stimulus (Perky 1910). If subjects can hear an imagined sound in their mind’s ear vividly enough to mistake it for a presented sound—as indeed our subjects often did, reporting hearing signals in both noise intervals even though they were strictly presented in only one (see McWalter and McDermott 2019)—then imagery may change the nature of the behavioral task. The addition of subjectively experienced imagery may transform an objective signal detection task into a subjective intensity discrimination task. The two intervals to be discriminated would be one containing [auditory imagery + noise] and the other containing [external signal + auditory imagery + noise]. Crossmodal facilitation may therefore occur because a visual stimulus triggers auditory imagery.

We showed that crossmodal sensitivity enhancement is modulated by subjective visual experience. Whichever object was consciously seen in the mind’s eye would have been the same one consciously heard in the mind’s ear. Indeed, there is evidence that simply imagining the sight of an object can affect auditory perception of the object (Berger and Ehrsson 2013). These examples of crossmodal imagery may be considered cases of crossmodal perceptual completion (Spence and Deroy 2013).


Is consciousness necessary for crossmodal sensitivity enhancement?

We found enhancement of auditory sensitivity when a congruent object, rather than an incongruent object, was in visual consciousness. However, this does not imply that visual consciousness is required for visual-to-auditory enhancement. Unconscious vision—of a picture masked by CFS—is still capable of driving object-based visual attention (Chou and Yeh 2012). It is possible that unconscious vision could drive auditory attention. But we are aware of no unconscious priming method, visual or otherwise, that can elicit specific auditory imagery. If the auditory sensitivity enhancement observed in our study is mediated not by auditory attention but by auditory imagery, we would predict that the visual cue must reach the level of visual awareness to be effective.

In the domain of language, reaction times to auditory stimuli can be enhanced with invisible visual cues. Identification of an auditory spoken word was speeded by CFS-masked visual speech of the congruent word (Plass et al. 2014). There is even evidence for congruency priming of audiovisual letters and numbers when subjects are unaware of both sight and sound (Faivre et al. 2014). However, we have come across no evidence that invisible visual cues may enhance auditory sensitivity, rather than auditory reaction times. On balance, we believe that the crossmodal enhancement observed in our study is probably mediated by conscious imagery.


Conclusions

In summary, we show that seeing an object improves hearing for the sounds made by that object. This generalizes an interesting effect, previously circumscribed to lip reading of speech, to a much wider domain of real-world objects. This crossmodal enhancement was modulated by conscious visibility of the stimulus: you can better hear an object when you can consciously see that object. We identify mental imagery as the likely mediator of these effects. Perhaps more significantly, we connect the phenomenon of consciousness—thought to be related to the global broadcast of semantic information (Baars 1997)—with functional consequences on the ability of one sensory modality to enhance the sensitivity of another.


How mood tunes prediction: a neurophenomenological account of mood and its disturbance in major depression

Julian Kiverstein, Mark Miller, Erik Rietveld — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7425816, CC BY 4.0.

In this article, we propose a neurophenomenological account of what moods are, and how they work. We draw upon phenomenology to show how mood attunes a person to a space of significant possibilities. Mood structures a person’s lived experience by fixing the kinds of significance the world can have for them in a given situation. We employ Karl Friston’s free-energy principle to show how this phenomenological concept of mood can be smoothly integrated with cognitive neuroscience. We will argue that mood is a consequence of acting in the world with the aim of minimizing expected free energy—a measure of uncertainty about the future consequences of actions. Moods summarize how the organism is faring overall in its predictive engagements, tuning the organism’s expectations about how it is likely to fare in the future. Agents that act to minimize expected free energy will have a feeling of how well or badly they are doing at maintaining grip on the multiple possibilities that matter to them. They will have what we will call a ‘feeling of grip’ that structures the possibilities they are ready to engage with over long time-scales, just as moods do.

Keywords: mood, predictive processing, depression, phenomenology, error dynamics


Introduction

In what follows, we will propose a neurophenomenological theory of what moods are—a core, but often overlooked aspect of our first-person experience of the world. On the one hand, we put phenomenological ideas to work to show how mood structures lived experience. On the other hand, we set out to show how neurobiology can make sense of these phenomenological descriptions of mood in the terms of the free-energy principle (FEP) (Friston 2010). We call our account of mood, ‘neurophenomenological’ because it aims to smoothly integrate phenomenological description with cognitive neuroscientific explanation. Our use of the term ‘neurophenomenology’ (here abbreviated as ‘NP’) departs somewhat from that of Varela (1996). He originally introduced the term to describe an experimental method in which subjects in an experiment would be actively involved in identifying invariant and structural features of lived experience. In what follows, we do not draw our phenomenological descriptions of experience from experiments but instead base our descriptions on reflection on lived experience and its disturbance in psychopathology. In developing a neurophenomenological account of mood, we take as our starting point the phenomenological concept of an agent’s tending towards an optimal grip on the possibilities that matter to them (Merleau-Ponty 1962/2012; Dreyfus 2005; Rietveld 2008; Bruineberg & Rietveld 2014). In earlier work, we have shown how this phenomenological concept can be understood as a consequence of anticipatory biological processes on the basis of which living systems minimize their own free energy—an information-theoretic measure of surprise or uncertainty. Our aim in this article to establish whether the phenomenology of mood can likewise be analysed in terms of tending towards an optimal grip on a field of relevant action possibilities. We will argue that mood is a consequence of acting in the world with the aim of minimizing expected free energy. The key claim we set out to defend is that any agent that acts with the aim of minimizing expected free energy will have a feeling of how well or badly they are doing at tending towards an optimal grip. They will have what we will call a ‘feeling of grip’ that structures the possibilities they are ready to engage with over long time-scales, just as moods do.

In the first (Mood as a phenomenological structure of lived experience) section, we sketch a phenomenological account of mood (sometimes called ‘existential feeling’; Ratcliffe 2008). We show how mood structures the agent’s lived experience of the world by fixing the kinds of significance a situation has for them as they engage with the world. In the second (The feeling of grip) section, we revisit arguments developed in earlier work that the tendency towards an optimal grip can be thought of as arising out of an imperative to minimize free energy all living beings share in common. This allows us to frame the question which will occupy us in the remainder of the article of whether the phenomenology of mood can also be analysed in terms of tending towards an optimal grip. The third (How mood tunes prediction) section describes how mood can be understood in terms of momentum in minimizing expected free energy. Moods we suggest, summarize how the organism is faring overall in its predictive engagements, and tune expectations about how the organism will fare in the future. We suggest such an account of mood amounts to a redescription of the phenomenological account of mood in the terms of the FEP. In the fourth (Hopelessness and anhedonia in major depression) section, we show how our neurophenomenological account of mood might explain some key aspects of the lived experience (e.g. anhedonia and the loss of hope) that people can experience in major depression.


Mood as a Phenomenological Structure of Lived Experience

In everyday lived experience, a person’s mood reflects how they find themselves in the world. The existence of a living being is never carefree. We always find ourselves in one mood or another because there is always some way in which the world matters to us. Even boredom and indifference are ways of finding ourselves situated in relation to the world. Heidegger’s term Befindlichkeit captures the phenomenology of mood well (Heidegger 1927/1962). The reflexive verb befinden is used to say how and where one finds oneself in relation to the world—it might for instance be used in responding to the question ‘How are you?’ (Colombetti 2014, 12). The situation in which we find ourselves can be pleasant, unpleasant, fascinating or boring, comforting or disturbed, safe or threatening and so on. These are descriptions of possible ways in which the world can matter, or be of significance to a person. A situation can show up as being significant to the person in these ways only because of the mood the person finds themselves in.

Moods are not internal subjective mental states that have as their cause external states of the environment. They arise out of our being in the world (Heidegger 1927/1962, 176). Imagine you are walking alone on a dark night in an unfamiliar part of town when you feel the presence of a stranger following you. The situation as a whole is all of a sudden experienced as one fraught with threat. Our emotion of fear is directed at the person following us, but only because the situation as a whole is experienced as threatening (Heidegger 1927/1962, 180). Threat in this example describes something of how you find yourself in the world. It is a mood that structures how you experience your current situation, and the kind of significance the situation as a whole takes on.

Ratcliffe offers a detailed analysis of the phenomenology of mood in terms of bodily feelings that situate an individual in the world, orienting them in a space of possibilities. For Ratcliffe moods fix the kinds of significance the world can be encountered as having, opening or closing the individual to specific possibilities (Ratcliffe 2008; c.f. Fuchs 2013). In the previous example, it is because you feel threatened that the world can be encountered by you as dangerous. Danger here is the kind of significance the situation can have because the situation you find yourself in is threatening. Ratcliffe’s talk of bodily feeling should be distinguished on the one hand from emotional states like fear, sadness or anger that involve some explicit appraisal or evaluation of the subject’s relation to the world. Emotions are sometimes felt in the body. They include what is sometimes called ‘core affect’ made up of arousal and valence components (Russell 2003). However, bodily feelings as Ratcliffe uses the term have a pre-reflective or background status—they make possible the full-blown emotional states a person can have. Think again of the example of the threatening situation—mood describes the way you find yourself situated in the world. Feeling threatened is a kind of concern on the basis of which one can experience an emotion such as fear of some particular thing or person (Heidegger 1962; Ratcliffe 2008). It is because our ways of caring about the world include being threatened that particular things can show up for us as being dangerous, and thus elicit an emotion of fear. Moods understood as pre-reflective background bodily feelings open us to a world of significant possibilities, a world with which we are involved, and in which we can feel more or less at home.

The notion of bodily feeling Ratcliffe uses to describe the phenomenology of mood should likewise be distinguished from bodily sensations such as itches, pains or tickles. (We thank an anonymous reviewer for emphasizing the importance of this distinction.) Bodily sensations are the more or less subtle changes sensed at specific locations in the body from the inside. Bodily feelings however need not be localized bodily experience but can consist in a ‘general sensitivity to the world’ (Slaby 2008). Moreover, bodily feelings need not be discrete episodes with a more or less well-defined, dateable beginning and end. They can arise in the course of our wider activities, structuring our overall style of engagement with the world. Bodily sensations can sometimes structure the person’s sense of what is possible. Think of how pain for instance can infuse your overall experience of your situation, shrinking your openness to the world and the practical possibilities it offers. People that suffer with migraine for instance, sometimes say all they can do is hide away in a dark room. The distinction between bodily feelings and sensations is thus not always sharp. It is nevertheless a distinction it is important to observe if we are to use the notion of bodily feeling to understand the phenomenology of mood as Ratcliffe proposes. Many sensations are localized bodily episodes like itches that occur without the sensation structuring the person’s overall sense of the kinds of possibilities the world offers. Bodily sensations can occur that do not incorporate any world-directedness beyond what the person senses in their body. Moods by contrast arise out of a person’s being in the world, making manifest how a person is faring in their engagement with the world. Lauren Freeman describes the phenomenology of mood well when she writes: ‘We are in moods with the entirety of our being, and out of our moods the world as a whole is disclosed to us’ (Freeman 2014, 453).

Moods have been analysed in philosophy as ‘generalized emotions’ that lack a clear focus because they are directed towards the world as a whole, not towards particular objects (see e.g. Solomon 1993, 71). The difference between mood and other emotions is that moods provide a general colouring or tone to emotional experience. In psychology moods are typically understood as long-lasting, internal states of subjects that differ from emotions only in their duration and lack of a specific object they are directed towards (see e.g. Ekman and Davidson 1994, and for critical discussion, Freeman 2014). Such a conflation of mood with emotion cannot be correct if mood is what makes it possible for things to be of emotional significance to us. Without mood there would be no emotion. If the world lacks practical significance for a person for instance, as it does in some experiences of major depression, the emotions of hope or worry about some practical project and its outcome no longer make sense. The depressed person literally experiences a world without hope in which no projects call out as worth pursuing (Ratcliffe 2015).

Mood we suggest structures lived experience by entailing an anticipation-fulfilment structure for lived experience. Think of the feeling of hope that takes root after an interview for a big project grant goes really well, and one comes to expect a positive outcome. Then the disappointing news is received that the application was unsuccessful. Binswanger describes the experience well when he writes how ‘the world—in one stroke—becomes “different”’ (Binswanger 1975, 222–3). The meaningful possibilities one anticipated as on the horizon, immediately fall away. As a further example familiar to many of us, consider Ractliffe’s example of feeling at ease in teaching a class one has prepared carefully in advance. He describes how one experiences the class situation as a whole as the ‘confident, unproblematic anticipation and fulfilment of various significant possibilities’ (Ratcliffe 2017, 164). One’s engagement with the class is characterized by a ‘diffuse feeling of ease or confidence’ (Ibid.). Ratcliffe’s example is an illustration of a skill-based understanding we bring to every encounter with the world on the basis of which we have an experience of belonging, or being at home in the world.

In the next section, we begin the work of making sense of this phenomenological conception of mood in neurobiological terms. We aim to show how the anticipation-fulfilment structure of lived experience can be mapped onto the anticipatory dynamics of free-energy minimizing systems that tend towards an optimal grip in their engagements with the world. The question we take up in the rest of our article is whether the role of mood in shaping the anticipatory structure of lived experience can likewise be understood in terms of the dynamics of free-energy minimization.


The Feeling of Grip

The FEP posits that all systems that maintain their organization in their exchanges with a dynamic environment will minimize their own free energy. The principle was formulated by Karl Friston to understand the organizational properties of complex biological systems, from plants and single cells all the way up to humans, and the social networks they form with each other (Friston and Stephan, 2007; Friston 2010, Allen and Friston 2018). What these biological processes all share in common is that they show self-organizing behaviour. They are open systems in which global order arises through the coupling of the system’s internal dynamics to the external dynamics of the system’s econiche. Second, and relatedly, all of these biological processes are adaptive systems that maintain their organization when perturbed from the outside. FEP purports to identify the organizational properties a complex adaptive system must have if it is to preserve its organization for an extended and prolonged period of time in a dynamic environment. What behaviours must the system select—how must it act—if it is to continue to exist, and stay away from catastrophic phase transitions (destructive changes in its organization)? In this section, we revisit our ecological-enactive interpretation of the FEP with the aim of bringing out how FEP calls into question any dualistic separation of bodily feeling from life. (Our ecological-enactive interpretation of FEP is developed in more detail in earlier articles co-authored with Jelle Bruineberg—see Bruineberg & Rietveld 2014, Bruineberg, Kiverstein & Rietveld 2018.) FEP as we will interpret it implies that complex adaptive systems must be agents with their own concernful point of view on the world. Feelings (and we will eventually argue, mood) grow smoothly out of such concern.


2.1. The FEP: an ecological-enactive reading

The FEP takes as its starting point the observation that any complex adaptive system must actively regulate its behaviour so as to remain in a dissipative, far from thermodynamic equilibrium steady state (Friston and Stephan 2007). Complex adaptive systems are by definition, systems that are able to stay away from thermodynamic equilibrium—a state of a physical system in which there is no exchange of matter and energy either within the system, or with the environment. Thermodynamic equilibrium means death for living systems: a system isolated from external influence will, in accordance with the second law, increase in disorder or entropy over time. Complex adaptive systems keep entropy to a minimum by for instance finding the energy they need to fuel their actions. To endure for any period of time, living systems must at the same time negotiate a changing environment so to avoid destructive phase transitions. They must for instance avoid extremes of temperature or pressure that threaten their continued integrity. More generally, they must act selectively on the environment in ways that fit with change in their surroundings.

The FEP states that the actions any complex adaptive system should select are those that minimize surprising or improbable sensory exchanges with the environment. The internal states of a complex adaptive system can be described in terms of an attractor landscape—a set of attractor states the system tends to revisit regularly over time under a wide range of initial conditions (Friston 2012). The set of attractor states for the system will be internal states that are highly probable given the system’s phenotype and the kind of niche it inhabits. In the FEP, the internal states of the system are said to be a ‘model’ of the system’s ecological niche by means of which the system can steer its actions. The purpose of the model is to anticipate perturbations imposed by the ecological niche so that the system can adapt its actions appropriately. For this reason, we have described the generative model as a ‘system of anticipations’ (see (Bruineberg & Rietveld 2019). (We should note this is perhaps not the standard way of understanding the generative model. The generative model is standardly understood as functioning like a map that encodes statistical regularities on the basis of which the organism can infer the hidden causes of its sensory signals (Gladziejewski 2016; Kiefer and Hohwy 2017). (See Ramstead et al. (2019) for a critique of this standard understanding of the generative model, and an enactive reading of ‘model’ talk in line with the one we assume in this article.) The model in steering the system’s action generates exteroceptive, proprioceptive and interoceptive sensory states that form a narrow region of the state space that defines the possible sensory states of the system. Sensory states that fall within this region are unsurprising and expected, while sensory states that fall outside of this narrow region are improbable for the system, and thus are surprising, or unexpected. To remain well adapted to its environment, the system should avoid sensory exchanges that are surprising, and sample the environment for sensory outcomes that are expected. Organisms however have no tractable way of calculating the surprise value (or improbability) of their sensory states. The FEP says organisms get round this problem by using free energy as an upper bound on surprise. Free energy is always greater than surprise. Thus by keeping free energy to a minimum biological systems will also succeed in minimizing surprise (Friston 2010).

The FEP in a nutshell ‘states that all the quantities that can change (i.e. that are a part of the system), will change to minimize free energy’ (Friston and Stephan 2007). These quantities are the internal dynamics (e.g. the parameters of the agent’s internal model biologically realized as weights and biases in the system’s neural dynamics if it has a brain), and the external dynamics in the environment which the agent intervenes in through its actions. The result of minimizing the free energy of its internal dynamics is that the agent’s internal dynamics will be well adapted to causal regularities in the environment. The model can be used to steer the agent’s actions because the outcomes that are anticipated based on the model are ones that closely approximate what happens when the agent acts. The organism will thereby tend on average to avoid surprising and improbable sensory states. By minimizing the free energy of its internal dynamics, the system will also keep surprise to a limit.

The second quantity that can change so as to minimize free energy is the external dynamics that describe the agent’s interaction with its environment. We take the external dynamics to describe the dynamics of the agent’s eco-niche. Through its actions the agent can change the structure of the environment, bringing about sensory states that match those the agent expects given its internal dynamics. The agent will selectively sample the space of possible sensory inputs for those sensory outcomes it expects to encounter. The sensory outcomes the agent expects will be fixed by the agent’s phenotype and the ecological niche it grows up in. So long as the agent succeeds in fulfilling its expectations through its actions, it will typically find itself in sensory states that are unsurprising, avoiding improbable sensory encounters that are a threat to its viability. By minimizing the free energy of its external dynamics, the agent will thereby bound the surprise value of its sensory states.

The FEP posits that so long as the internal and external dynamics change over time to minimize free energy, the result will be that the organism will remain well adapted to its niche. We have seen above how the FEP states how a living system should act if it is to remain viable in a changing environment. The actions the organism should select if it is to minimize free energy are the actions likely to lead the organism to remain well adapted in its engagement with the ecological niche, and thus to flourish. Free energy thus quantifies how well or badly the organism is doing in its engagement with the environment. Organisms should (if they are to succeed in minimizing free energy over time) self-regulate their coupling with the environment. They should continue on a promising path when all is going well, or when things are going better than expected. They should shift to doing something else when things are not going as well as expected. If they are to minimize free energy, organisms should develop an internal dynamics geared to steering them in the direction of flourishing.


2.2. The tendency towards an optimal grip

So far in this section, we have described how living systems should actively regulate their engagement with the world so as to minimize free energy because doing so will maximize the probability of their own flourishing in their niche. Crucially, a system that modulates its engagement with the environment according to its sense of how well it is faring can be said to have an ‘inner life’—a point of view on its environment relative to which it can make distinctions between doing better or worse, well or badly. The FEP thus calls into question any separation of the inner life of the organism from its biological organization. We have seen above how any system that succeeds in minimizing free energy will regulate its engagement with its niche on the basis of its own inner sense of how it is faring. Nor does it make sense to separate the behaviour of the organism from its sense of how well or badly it is attuned to what it cares about in its environment. The sensory states the organism aims to bring about through its actions correct for deviations from the organism’s own flourishing in its niche. This state of flourishing can be thought of as an optimum for the organism. The organism senses its deviation from this optimum and acts to move closer towards an optimal relation to its ecological niche. We call this dynamic ‘the tendency towards an optimal grip’, drawing upon Merleau-Ponty’s notion of maximal prise (Merleau-Ponty 1962/2012).

Consider as an illustration, Merleau-Ponty’s description of the relation the football player takes up to the other players and the football field in a game of football. Merleau-Ponty describes the football field as ‘pervaded by lines of force (the ‘yard lines’; those which demarcate the ‘penalty area’) and articulated in sectors (for example the ‘openings’ between the adversaries) which call for a certain mode of action’ (Merleau-Ponty 1942/1963, 168). The different regions of the pitch and the other players are marked out for the player as inviting specific actions more or less appropriate to what is happening in the game as it unfolds. There are a near open-ended number of possible actions available to the player. Of the possible actions the player could perform, some stand out as to be done here and now as the game unfolds. Others concern the directing of the future course of the game as an attack builds. Still other actions are just not relevant possibilities at all in the player’s current situation, such as lying down on the grass in the midst of the game to take a nap.

We suggest it is based on their sense of how they are currently faring as a skilled player that affordances stand out as inviting in the game. We borrow the term ‘affordance’ from the ecological psychologist James Gibson using the term for the possibilities for action the environment makes available (see Gibson 1979, chapter 8). To be more precise, we define affordances as relations between aspects of the socio-material environment in flux and the abilities available in a form of life (Rietveld & Kiverstein 2014; Van Dijk & Rietveld 2016). So we use the term ‘affordance’ in a broad sense—the affordances of the human environment are as rich and extensive as the skills and abilities available to humans. We call relevant affordances that stand out as calling for action, ‘invitations’ (Dreyfus and Kelly 2007; Withagen et al. 2012). The skills the player has developed give them a feel for how well or badly things are going in the game, both at a given moment in time and looking ahead into the future (Rietveld 2008). They have an immediate felt appreciation for what would be required for things to go better. It is on the basis of this feel for the game that the affordances unfolding in the game stand out as inviting, calling to them to take a certain course of action. In responding to inviting affordances agents tend towards an optimal grip; they can be ‘moved to improve’ by these invitations (Rietveld 2008). Certain affordances stand out as inviting because the agent deviates from an optimal relation of equilibrium with the environment. Affordances are inviting when they move the agent closer towards equilibrium—when they enable the agent to improve its grip on the possibilities that matter to them as a skilled agent.

Humans are skilled at acting in many different contexts and situations. They have grown into and become skilled participants in a multiplicity of different practices in their everyday life. They thus have a multiplicity of different (and sometimes conflicting) cares and concerns that feed into their sensitivity to how they are faring in their practical engagement with the word. The person will thus always be readying themselves for acting on several relevant affordances. The multiple relevant affordances the individual is ready to engage with form a structured field in dynamic flux. In acting to minimize free energy, the skilled individual will be ready to act in ways that are responsive to a whole field of relevant affordances.

The question we take up in the remainder of our article is whether the tendency towards an optimal grip on a field of relevant affordances can account for the phenomenology of mood. Can we use the tendency towards an optimal grip to explain how mood can structure the person’s sense of what is significant in the situation they find themselves in? Anticipation we have been arguing should be thought of in terms of free-energy minimization. The significance the individual experiences their situation as having should therefore fall naturally out of an agent that is sensitive to how well or badly they are doing in minimizing free energy. We explore how this might work in the remainder of our article.


How Mood Tunes Prediction

We have seen in the first (Mood as a phenomenological structure of lived experience) section how the mood a person finds themselves in structures the kinds of significance they experience in a given situation. Is the notion of ‘inviting affordances’ sufficiently broad in its application to cover the many kinds of significance the individual can experience? Ratcliffe has argued it is not. He claims that the notion of affordance is too coarse-grained to capture the different ways in which a situation can appear meaningful to an individual (Ratcliffe 2015, 61; c.f. Dings 2018; Ratcliffe and Broome, forthcoming). A situation can be exciting or boring, comforting in its familiarity or disturbing in its strangeness. A situation can be of interpersonal significance offering up possibilities for conversation, and friendship, pride or shame. Ratcliffe has argued that such differences in the significance a situation can have cannot be understood in terms of the way in which affordances can invite action. Ratcliffe’s critique stems from his restricting his focus to the invitation of a single affordance, and the attractive or repelling quality of an individual affordance. We would argue however that inviting affordances do not have significance taken in isolation from the structure of the field of relevant affordances as a whole. It is to the structure of the field as a whole that we should look for an account of the kinds of significance Ratcliffe takes moods to disclose.

For the person experiencing hopefulness, for instance, the field will have a structure with temporal depth, in which the future offers the promise of many inviting possibilities. For a person experiencing boredom, the field will be structured so that the immediate situation offers nothing of interest. We’ve suggested that the field of relevant affordances has the structure it does because of the individual’s skills and their immediate felt sense of how well things are going in their dynamic engagement with the world. We propose to think of mood as giving an individual a feel for how well or badly they are gripping to the field as a whole. On the basis of this feeling, the situation as a whole is experienced as having a particular significance.


3.1. Error dynamics track grip

When you ask a person how their day is going they will likely answer by giving a general overall sense of how they are doing. They say they are doing well or badly or perhaps just fine. They are indicating something about how they find themselves in the world given what matters to them. We suggest this overall sense of how well or badly things are going is based on expectations of how free energy is likely to change over time. It has recently been proposed that the positive or negative valence of emotions can be understood in terms of the rate of change in free energy (Joffily and Corricelli 2013; for a related proposal see Van de Cruys 2017; Kiverstein et al. 2019; Miller et al. 2020). The negative valence of fear maps onto free energy increasing faster over time. The positive valence of hope maps onto free energy decreasing at a fast rate. We will refer to the change in free energy over time as ‘error dynamics’ because free energy is a measure of the mismatch between the sensory states the agent expects given the generative model it embodies, and the sensory states it comes to occupy. Whenever there is a mismatch detected and thus a change in free energy, this is because the agent’s expectations are in error. (When we use the term ‘error’, we do not mean this term to be understood in a semantic sense. It is common in the literature on the FEP to interpret the generative model as encoding prior beliefs with semantic content. Error can thus be interpreted as a consequence of the generative model failing to represent the hidden external causes of sensory input correctly. We suggest by contrast an understanding of error in terms of pragmatic success—error has the consequence that the agent fails to adapt its actions adequately to its econiche.) Change in free energy over time can thus be thought of in terms of error dynamics—how fast or slow error increases or decreases over time.

The FEP states that the generative model the organism embodies aims to keep free energy to a minimum over time. Error dynamics can thus be thought of as providing feedback for the organism about the quality of the generative model it embodies. This feedback informs the organism of how well or badly the model is doing at adapting the organism to its econiche. More specifically, the change in the quantity of free energy can be used by the agent to track volatility or uncertainty about the temporal evolution of states in the environment (Joffily and Coricelli 2013). Free energy increases or decreases with environmental volatility. The more volatility there is estimated to be in the world, the more uncertain the agent should be about acting. Thus error dynamics can be used as a proxy for uncertainty about the outcome of actions. Fear for instance is experienced by an agent in a situation in which free energy is increasing at an accelerating rate. Increasing free energy is equivalent to accumulating surprise. It signifies that the sensory evidence the agent has sampled fails to match what the agent anticipates given the model it embodies. The agent should not rely on such a model to steer its actions—it cannot be confident that the actions it selects will lead to the sensory outcomes it prefers. Now contrast this with the situation in which the agent is hopeful because free energy is being reduced fast. The agent can in this situation be confident that the actions it selects will lead to the preferred outcomes it expects.

Free-energy minimizing agents should not only care about uncertainty in the present but should in addition make use of their past experiences to keep track of future or expected free energy. We have seen how free-energy minimizing agents expect to do well and flourish in their niche. They act in ways that aim to fulfil this expectation. They face the challenge of how to transition from their current situation at time t0 (e.g. hunger) to their preferred state at some future time t1 (e.g. digesting a nutritious meal). We have seen above how the multiple affordances stand out as inviting are the affordances the agent anticipates will lead them from their current situation (at t0) to the sensory outcome in the future (at t1) they expect. The agent’s present situation provides sensory evidence that favours to differing degrees, a selection of the action possibilities available to them. The agent must select affordances that minimize expected free energy—the difference between the sensory states the agents expects to sample in the future (i.e. those that are associated with a state of flourishing or well-being, e.g. being well-fed), and those attainable from their current situation. The affordances that minimize expected free energy should stand out as relevant to the agent and as inviting action.

Following Joffily and Coricelli (2013), we suggest that error dynamics can be used as a measure of the likely performance of an action policy. Joffily and Coricelli (2013) base their hypothesis on the simulation of an agent that learns to maximize reward in playing against a one-armed bandit slot machine under varying conditions of volatility. One agent explicitly estimates the volatility of environmental states (the probability of reward), while the other agent relies on what we have called error dynamics—the change in free energy over time. They show (among other things) how the agent that uses error dynamics to track volatility can not only match the performance of an agent that explicitly estimates volatility but can also out-perform such an agent when shifting from conditions of low to high volatility. They write ‘With the addition of emotional valence to the model, the agent becomes even more reactive and is able to track fast changes in the environment’ (p. 7).) Insofar as the agent is aiming at minimizing future or expected free energy, they must somehow keep track of whether the free energy of their current sensory states and the free energy of their future sensory states increases at a faster or slower rate than expected as a consequence of their actions. It is an important and (to our knowledge) open question how the tracking of error dynamics might be neurobiologically implemented. Work on active inference suggests that neurotransmitters such as dopamine will do part of this work (Fitzgerald et al. 2014; Friston et al. 2012, 2014; Schwartenbeck et al. 2015a,b). Dopaminergic midbrain regions are widely accepted to play a role in tracking reward prediction errors (see e.g. Schultz et al. 1997)—they track whether the outcomes of the individual’s actions were better or worse than expected. Thus when an animal receives more food than expected this is strongly correlated with dopaminergic change in the nucleus accumbens (Hart et al. 2014). A similar response was found in humans when they performed better than expected in a financial reward task (Rutledge et al. 2010). In work on active inference, the dopamine system is taken to be a part of a complex dynamical system that optimizes precision expectations through learning. (This process of optimization is given a neurobiological characterization in terms of optimizing the sensitivity of post-synaptic gain of cells. Phasic discharges in the dopamine system are hypothesized to signal error in precision expectations. Tonic discharge of dopamine is hypothesized to influence the post-synaptic gain on such error signals leading to an update of precision expectations (Friston 2012, 276).) We have suggested above that active inference is the process of selecting the relevant affordances that are expected to minimize the mismatch between current and future sensory inputs the agent expects to occupy so long as it is flourishing. Dopaminergic discharges weigh the agent’s confidence in relevant affordances given the agent’s skills and abilities (Friston et al., 2012; Miller, Kiverstein & Rietveld 2020; Kiverstein, Rietveld, Slagter & Denys 2019; Linson, Clark, Ramamoorthy, & Friston 2018).

We are suggesting the dopaminergic system is part of a complex system sensitive to changes in the rate of error reduction. Weighing the precision of relevant affordances is work best done in part through keeping track of error dynamics (Miller et al. 2020). Information about rate of change in error reduction is valuable feedback that can be used to fine-tune precision estimations. If the dopamine system is implicated in the process of precision estimation (as is suggested by Friston et al. 2012; Fitzgerald et al. 2014; Schwartenbeck et al. 2015a,b), dopaminergic neurons should keep track of error dynamics. (We focus above on the role of the dopamine system in enabling the person’s sensitivity to error dynamics because the precision estimation has been shown to map onto reward learning systems in the brain (see e.g. Fitzgerald et al. 2014; Schwartenbeck et al. 2015a,b). The recent literature on active inference suggests however that there may be multiple ascending neuromodulatory systems involved in estimating precision. Parr and Friston (2017) hypothesize that cholinergic projections to the cortex may track precision of expected outcomes given states of world, while noradrenergic systems track the precision of state transitions or unexpected uncertainty arising from environmental volatility.)

By using error dynamics to weigh the precision of relevant affordances, the agent can maximize the probability that the sensory states it brings about through its actions are ones that minimize expected free energy. To see this, consider how to minimize expected free energy the agent must maximize the predictive success of the model it instantiates (c.f. Phillips 2013). It is only if the agent can accurately and precisely forecast the future sensory consequences of its actions that the agent will succeed in selecting the relevant affordances most likely to minimize expected free energy. (See Hesp and colleagues’ (preprint) for a detailed computational analysis of the role of valence in the process of selecting actions that minimise expected free energy. Their account of affective valence complements well the account of mood we develop in this article.) Using error dynamics as feedback will therefore help to maximize the quality of the generative model and its predictions. It will ensure that the agent continually makes progress in developing its skills, and actively seeks out sensory states that are not so complex as to be unpredictable, nor so simple as to be fully predictable no longer allowing the agent to learn anything. (Evidence that this is indeed the strategy free-energy minimizing agents deploy comes from research on learning progress in developmental psychology and robotics. Thus Kidd et al. (2012) show that 7- to 8-month infants show a preference for sequence of events that are neither too predictable as to bore them, nor too complex so that they are unable to predict them. They were most likely to look away when complexity was either too high or too low, and prefer to look at sequences that are novel enough to hold their interest. The enjoyment of novelty helps the infant to continually make progress in learning, allowing for the learning of a generative model able to manage a dynamical environment over increasingly longer periods of time. This hypothesis is borne out by work in epigenetic robotics in which progress in learning is associated with an intrinsic reward, and the robotic agent is motivated to act in ways that maximize this reward (Oudeyer and Smith 2016). For further discussion, see Kiverstein et al. 2019.) An agent that aims to continually make progress in its predictions will tend to be drawn into action by relevant affordances that maximize the probability of its continually improving its grip on the possibilities that matter. By maximizing the predictive success of its model, the agent will thus maximize the probability of its own flourishing (Kiverstein et al. 2019).


3.2. Mood as momentum in free-energy reduction

We suggest that positive and negative moods can be thought of as a reflection of the overall momentum or expected direction in error dynamics. (We base this proposal on work by Eldar et al. (2016). They frame their hypothesis in terms of reward learning but reward can be shown to map onto expected sensory states using the FEP as we briefly explained above. (For a more detailed account see e.g. Friston et al. 2009). James Clark in a co-authored paper with Friston has proposed an account of mood that converges with the one we are outlining (Clark et al. 2018). Like us, they propose to understand mood in terms of expected free energy. Clark et al. suggest that emotions track uncertainty about the consequences of action—the precision with which motor and physiological states consequent on action can be predicted. Moods they argue are expectations about uncertainty that determine how emotions change over time. Thus, the low mood people experience in major depression they conceptualize as certainty that the person will encounter an uncertain, volatile environment. In anxiety disorders (which they distinguish from major depression), the person expects with low confidence to encounter a volatile and unpredictable environment. Finally, Clark et al. show how in mania a person may expect with high confidence positive (expected rewarding) outcomes of their actions. We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for drawing our attention to the work of Clark et al.) Moods are expectations of rate of change in free energy. They are projections for the agent of how well or badly their activities are likely to go in the future.

By ‘momentum’ we mean the expected rate of error reduction over time. We use ‘momentum’ to refer to a general trend in free-energy reduction. Given their past experience, can an agent expect a future in which free energy will be reduced at an accelerating or at a decelerating rate? A positive mood like happiness depends not only on things going well, but on them going better than you had expected (Rutledge et al. 2014). Positive mood consists in an expectation of positive momentum in expected free-energy minimization. The agent expects that given its current situation free energy will decrease at an accelerating rate as a consequence of their actions. This biases upward their estimation of the probability of relevant affordances leading to preferred sensory outcomes. This upward biasing of expectations makes perfect sense in a natural world with all kinds of intermeshing regularities. For example, rewards are commonly interconnected, and often occur contiguously. A good rainy season means more food all around; spring means more food, while winter means food scarcity (Eldar et al. 2016). There is thus an adaptive advantage to allowing local successes and failures to help tune more global expectations about rewards. If for example, we find berries on a few bushes in a row, perhaps this means spring has arrived. In that case, we may benefit from updating our expectations about future berry finding in the area as a whole (not just on individual bushes).

Positive mood provides feedback for the organism of the overall, global trend in how it is faring, and whether or not the organism can expect to experience good times going forward into the future. A few experiences of positive (i.e. expected) outcomes in a row will lift mood, which if all goes well should steer the organism in the direction of expecting free energy to continue to decrease in the future. Similarly when one does not have a good grip on a given situation, perhaps because the situation is too complex, momentum in free-energy reduction will be negative. One will start to expect more failures and further increasing disattunement. In this case, negative mood provides feedback indicating the problematic overall negative trend in momentum. By tracking rate of change in free-energy reduction mood provides feedback that allows an agent to take into account general trends and the ‘impact of multiple environmental factors’ without having to calculate the individual impact of each factor (Eldar et al. 2016).

Given the structuring of expectations by moods, a rigidifying of either positive or negative mood will have detrimental consequences for the person’s well-being. A rigid positive mood will sooner or later lead an agent to fail to anticipate which affordances to engage to bring about preferred outcomes. Negative mood can enable an agent to engage flexibly and adaptively when things change by bringing expectations of opportunities for free-energy reduction back in line with reality. At some point, all the berries will have been consumed from the bushes. Thus, to continue to seek berries in a particular location will no longer serve the agent well. Negative moods signal negative momentum—the agent expects acceleration in the increase of free energy as consequence of their actions, leading to the biasing downwards of estimations of the precision of an inviting affordance (e.g. searching for berries on these very bushes). When opportunities to improve grip begin to diminish in this way, the ensuing negative mood allows our expectations to quickly tune to the unreliability of relevant inviting affordances for improving grip in the current circumstances.

So far we have been describing how mood may bias individuals to weigh precision in ways that maximize opportunities for the minimization of expected free energy. This would mean that when in a positive mood individuals should be more sensitive to and on the lookout for affordances that predict positive momentum—an acceleration in free-energy reduction. They will sample the environment for opportunities that confirm this expectation of a positive trend, predicting in extreme cases an overall state of flourishing in the future. This biasing of attention by positive mood in a dynamically changing environment will however inevitably lead to surprise. Joffily and Corricelli (2013) suggest it is a signature feature of positive mood understood in terms of error dynamics, that it will tend in the end to lead a person to overlook important changes in the environment (p. 4). The effect of this failure to attend to change will be an accumulation of error which will lead to negative affect, and a consequent swing to negative mood—an expectation of deceleration in the reduction of free energy. If the rate of change in free energy is greater than the individual expects (i.e. if there is a deceleration in free-energy reduction), this should grab their attention. They should begin to explore their environment on the lookout for opportunities to do better. As the person begins to fare better and free energy begins once again to decrease, this should feel good. Eventually, this will result in a swing to a positive mood when momentum takes a turn in the direction of acceleration in free-energy reduction.

Indeed, we suggest that a positive mood should be associated with a higher learning rate (i.e. high estimates of precision) for negative outcomes. By ‘negative outcomes’ we mean breaches in expected positive rate of change or acceleration (i.e. violation of expected continued momentum; c.f. Eldar et al. 2016, 7). Positive mood has been shown to dominate in healthy individuals (Diener and Diener 1996). Healthy individuals typically enjoy what is referred to as an ‘optimism bias’ (Sharot et al. 2016). The reason for this, we speculate, lies in part in the dynamic we have just described. Positive mood induces in individuals the expectation of continued trend of acceleration in free-energy reduction. At the same time, they fail to attend to changes in their circumstances which have the consequence that free energy begins to accumulate and momentum shifts downwards. Learning from negative momentum means the agent will be quick to recalibrate their expectations in a downward direction. Once their expectation for acceleration in free-energy reduction is brought down, it will become easier for them to find their way to opportunities for meeting those expectations. The result of this will be the agent begins to do better than expected and returns once again to a positive mood. Thus they will tend to spend more of their lives in a positive than negative mood.

To illustrate this virtuous circle induced by positive mood, suppose that a person expects to be an A student. They feel confident in their ability to learn. However, when they arrive at university they find they are now a C student. This would have the consequence that each time they encounter the same event (receiving a C on another paper assignment) this would result in negative surprise (feedback that they have done worse than the expected A grade). They start to feel bad, and this leads them to adjust their expectations of their own performance. Negative mood that arises from doing worse than expected (i.e. failing to fulfil their optimistic expectation of receiving an A) should, we hypothesize, lead to progress in learning. They start to expect to do badly, which in turn allows them to learn new strategies for improving their performance. This will allow them to benefit from incremental improvements relative to their actual (not just expected) skill level. They might for instance develop new action policies for studying. This will, if all goes well, in turn generate positive surprises, and thus improve their mood as their grades incrementally improve from the C they have begun to expect back up towards the performance of an A grade student.

When moods are functioning well in a free-energy minimizing regime, the strength and duration of the mood will fluctuate with rising and falling opportunities for minimizing expected free energy. The result of this tracking of momentum will be a tuning of a model that enables the agent to continuously tend towards an optimal grip on the field of relevant affordances as a whole. When things are going well, the agent will tend to continue on the same path. When things begin to take a turn for the worse, so also will their mood. Thus, the individual will be moved to do things differently, or even switch to doing something else, which will if things go well help to restore their fortunes.

However, changes in mood can only contribute to this improved grip when they help to shift upward or downward the agent’s precision estimations (i.e. the confidence the agent has that a relevant affordance is likely to lead to its expected state of flourishing). Precision estimates should ideally track the probability of an affordance leading to outcomes the agent expects. The agent’s confidence should march in step with the actual possibilities for minimizing expected free energy, or catch-up when such estimations fall behind (i.e. when the agent does worse or better than expected). As we have noted above, positive moods should persist only as long as the general trend is one in which the environment is providing better than expected opportunities to flourish. To offer an extreme example, research shows that lottery winners only enjoy a brief period of elation before returning to basically the same sense of wellbeing they had before they won (Brickman and Campbell 1971; Brickman et al. 1978; c.f. Van de Cruys 2017).

Not adjusting confidence when one’s circumstances take a turn for the worse can lead to serious dysfunction. For example, if an activity (for instance using a drug) repeatedly does better than expected at reducing free energy, then this activity will begin to stand out as highly inviting and salient. The activity will over time tend to be repeated more and more. This is what happens in substance addiction, where for example opioids act on the precision estimation circuitry in the midbrain so as to reinforce drug-seeking action policies (Schwartenbeck et al. 2015a; Miller et al. 2020). The result is that the drugs of addiction attract the user in increasingly powerful ways, while other opportunities for reward (social relationships, career, nutritious food, etc.) are increasingly ignored to the detriment of the organism. People grow up to expect a good relationship with family, a successful career, and operate with a biological expectation for food when hungry. Addiction leads to all of these expectations being frustrated, and thus to a pervasive build-up of free energy. Yet despite these negative outcomes, the affordances the use of the drug offers continue to be estimated as a good bet for minimizing expected free energy. It is this rigidification of the agent’s drug-using action policy, and the failure of the precision that is given to this policy to keep up with the overall downward momentum in the addict’s fortunes that can make addiction pathological. We can think of this in terms of the shrinkage of the field of relevant affordances to only those affordances that relate to the use of the addictive substance.

Major depression can arise when an agent operates with overly rigid expectations of positive momentum in free-energy reduction. The agent fails to correct its expectations when momentum turns negative, as we will discuss in more detail in the next section. The failure to recalibrate their expectations leads to a negative, and vicious circle of the opposite kind to that seen in healthy individuals that tend to consistently return to a positive mood. The depressed individual continues to expect an unrealistic positive momentum of free-energy reduction. They do so because unlike healthy individuals they exhibit a low learning rate for negative momentum. As long as they do not adjust their expectations of free-energy reduction downward, the world will continue to frustrate their efforts at acting in ways that allow them to flourish. Failing to flourish will become unsurprising to them. Such an agent will soon find themselves locked into a vicious cycle in which nothing they do contributes to bettering their situation. If the agent continues to meet the world with such expectations, no affordances will call to them as likely to lead to good outcomes. They will experience a field of relevant affordances in which everything is flat and nothing in particular stands out as worth doing either in the present, or going into the future.


Hopelessness and Anhedonia in Major Depression

Solomon in writing about his first-person experience of major depression tells us: ‘the first thing that goes is happiness. You cannot gain pleasure from anything’ (Solomon 2002, 19). The person experiencing major depression expects that nothing good could happen. Affordances that would previously have been inviting to the agent (e.g. succeeding at work, eating a fine meal) begin to appear less inviting, and so cease to draw the organism into action in the same way.

The persistent low mood associated with major depression we propose to understand in terms of negative momentum in expected free-energy minimization. We suggest low mood persists and rigidifies because the agent exhibits the opposite profile to healthy individuals—they exhibit a low learning rate for negative momentum in free-energy reduction. Evidence of low learning rate for negative momentum in depressed individuals comes from work showing that low serotonin makes people insensitive to negative outcomes (Bari et al. 2010; Eldar et al. 2016). This low learning rate results in overly rigid optimistic expectations. The person acts with expectations of free-energy reduction the world consistently fails to meet. An anonymous reviewer objected we must be mistaken in attributing overly optimistic expectations to people with major depression. The reviewer rightly observed that people with major depression show a pathological under confidence in the predictions of the outcomes of their actions coupled with a deep lack of self-worth. We are suggesting however that it is their harbouring of overly optimistic expectations that leads them to lack self-worth, and to have low confidence in their own abilities. For example, the person may expect parents that love and care for them but encounter only parental abuse and violence. The repeated frustration of their expectations of a nurturing home environment would lead to persistent and recurring error, and thus to low mood. Moreover, the frustration of this expectation for a stable and safe home environment is one they cannot change through their actions. Nothing they do seems to make any difference. Thus operating with what turns out to be an overly optimistic expectation will lead to an increase in free energy over time, and thus to low mood. While their low mood persists, they will continue to expect only uncertainty and thus to lack confidence in themselves and in the opportunities for flourishing the world offers (c.f. Clark et al. 2018). Some of these expectations may come from their phenotype and concern biological imperative like living in a safe and nurturing social environment that are frustrated by for example parental abuse and neglect, or growing up in a warzone. Normally this breaching of expectations would eventually lead to a recalibration—to an expectation of deceleration in free-energy reduction. But we suggest that because of low learning rate for negative momentum in free energy reduction this recalibration fails to occur. They do not adjust their expectations for positive momentum which means they don’t find their way to opportunities to do better in the way that healthy individuals do. Typically if an agent expects free energy to increase as a result of their actions, they will explore for alternative possibilities they can instead rely upon to lead them towards the outcomes they desire. When they find such affordances they will get the feedback that things have gone better than expected, and this improvement in fortune should over time translate into an improvement in mood. Recall again our example of the student above who had adapted his or her expectations so as to better make progress in their learning. But for the depressed individual none of this takes place. Instead they meet the world expecting only negative, unpredictable outcomes—they ready themselves for a world that is threatening to their well-being. (We see this in the physiology of the person in the hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis—the body stress response—and in proinflammatory immune activity that produce sickness behaviours aimed at reducing energy expenditure (Barrett et al. 2016).)

The source of the problem is low learning rate for negative momentum. The failure to update unrealistic expectations for free-energy reduction leads to rigidification of low mood. This has the consequence that the person’s precision estimates fail to march in step with the natural rises and falls in free energy that are a part of every individual’s engagement with a dynamic environment. Their persistent low mood means they fail to anticipate where the opportunities for improving grip are to be found. At this point an enduring feedback loop may emerge, driven by top-down expectations, whereby the organism begins to sample the environment in ways that confirms their depressed outlook. There is an important temporal progression to take note of here in the formation of this feedback loop. Low mood initially results from violations of expectation of positive momentum in free-energy reduction. Over time, the person comes to expect violations of such optimistic expectations—they come to expect not to flourish. This tipping point arguably marks the end of an adaptive low mood. At the outset of depression, low mood will often lead the person to take actions that improve their situation. Low mood can allow for the conservation and reallocation of energetic resources which can serve as an adaptive strategy for minimizing expected free energy in a threatening highly stressful, volatile, social environment (Barrett et al. 2016; Badcock et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2018). Rigid low mood however leads to what Badcock and colleagues have described as a ‘self-perpetuating cycle’, a positive feedback loop in which the persons samples the social world for sensory observations that confirm their expectation of suffering. One of the subjects (#75) Ratcliffe interviews tells him: ‘When I’m depressed life never seems worth living. I can never think about how my life is different when I’m not depressed. I think my life will never change and that I will always be depressed’ (Ratcliffe 2015, 69). The result of the rigidification of low mood is that the person doesn’t only experience a bad day every now and then, but they experience a loss of the possibility that the future could ever be good again.

First-person accounts of major depression often include descriptions of the person’s worldview shifting in important but difficult to express ways. A common experience that characterizes the phenomenology of major depression is a loss of depth, or a shrinking of the field of relevant affordances (De Haan et al. 2013). For the depressed person nothing seems interesting, no activity or event provokes a desire to engage. The ordinary scope for possible interactions with the world and others becomes greatly reduced. The world seems devoid of possibilities for improving their situation. Importantly, it is not only that the world lacks alluring things, it is that the possibility of being allured by affordances that contribute to the person’s well-being seems to have been altogether removed (Ratcliffe 2013, 586). The loss of this dynamic push-and-pull between the agent and the world that is ubiquitously felt in ordinary healthy experience produces a profound sense of estrangement—the depressed person and the world cease to fit together as they once had, the result is a feeling of strangeness, alienness or separateness. People will describe ‘being cut-off from an interpersonal world and stranded or incarcerated for all eternity in a different kind of world or reality’ (Ratcliffe 2015, 65).

This shrinking to nothing of significant possibilities can naturally be redescribed in terms of the affective structure of the field of relevant affordances as a whole (c.f. De Haan et al. 2013, 2015). We have shown above how inviting affordances stand out as relevant to an agent as a result of an increase in free energy the agent expects it can control through its actions. Precision we have been arguing, is estimated in part on the basis of error dynamics, and the expected deceleration or acceleration in free energy consequent on acting. The global downregulation of precision on affordances that happens through persistent low mood means that affordances that once solicited engagement will no longer invite as strongly, or at all. Notice however, that a pathological low mood in major depression signifies not only that one has lost confidence in particular affordances, but rather that there is a more global downregulation of expectations about any affordance succeeding at reducing error in the given environment. If the agent no longer has confidence in any of the affordances the environment offers them, this will have the consequence that they relate to a field of relevant affordances that is flat. This is arguably a difference in the kind of possibility the world can make available. The very possibility of anything standing out as significant is missing from their experience, and as a consequence, nothing calls them to action, except perhaps opportunities to end their life (Krueger and Colombetti 2018).

Badcock et al. (2017) propose that depressed mood can arise from the failure to attune to complex social niches, or more specifically, from the failure to share a reality with others. We suggest that a part of this social complexity might have to do with overly optimistic expectations for free-energy reduction, which the challenges of the person’s life circumstances conspire to frustrate. To offer another example, overly high expectations about success might be installed and sustained from family or culture. This would have the effect of setting precision weighting on a slope of error reduction that is much too high given the individual’s skills, abilities or environment. The result of not living up to those expectations would be negative surprise. In healthy and adaptive individuals, those errors would adjust precision expectations about the likelihood of future successes. However, depressed individuals, as we have already noted, learn to live in a world that offers only social distress. The failure to adjust to shifts in error dynamics can thus prove to be catastrophic for the person. When a person is bombarded by pathological negative surprise, or expects to always fail in their attempts at error reduction, they lose a sense of being able to improve in the ways that matter. The result is an experience of a world in which nothing matters—a world lacking in significance.


Conclusion

The neurophenomenological account of mood we have outlined in this article is premised on a synergy of ideas drawn from the FEP, affective neuroscience and phenomenological philosophy. Looking at minds from this vantage point brings together the biological, psychological, phenomenological and the social. We began by sketching the phenomenological account of mood due to Ratcliffe. The phenomenology of mood can be described in terms of the kinds of significance a situation has for a person. Moods are existential feelings that structure and give style to a person’s lived experience. It is because of the mood a person is in that the situation they are in appears to have the significance it does—i.e. threatening, or foreboding, exciting or boring. We have set out to show how our ecological-enactive reading of the FEP provides tools for redescribing the phenomenology of mood in the terms of cognitive neuroscience. Mood we suggested can be described in terms of expectation of momentum in free-energy minimization. When in a positive mood, an individual will expect positive momentum. They will expect the environment to offer plentiful opportunities for new and exciting ways to live a fulfilling life. Thus positive mood biases expectations of how the agent will fare in its engagement with the world upwards. We suggest this is an example of how mood could structure the significance the individual experiences a situation as having.

Crucially, the individual’s positive mood will typically only continue as long as they continue to do well in keeping expected free energy to a minimum. If free energy begins to accelerate, this will typically lead to a change in mood for the worse. When in a negative mood, an individual will expect negative momentum—the acceleration in the increase of free energy. They will expect to fail at finding opportunities for improving grip which may lead them to employ tricks that help to lift their mood (e.g. meeting with a friend or playing music; Colombetti and Krueger 2015). Again this is an example of how mood might work to structure an individual’s sense of the significance of the situation they are in.

When mood becomes rigidified and ceases to keep up with the changing fortunes of an individual, the result can be a profound change in the possibilities the individual anticipates. In major depression for instance, a fixed low mood leads the person to experience a world emptied of its meaningfulness. Typically, precision is continually being tuned by our sensitivity to error dynamics, which we take to arise as part of our skilful engagement with the continually shifting field of affordances. The hopelessness experienced in major depression arises in part as a consequence of a breakdown in this process. In our ordinary healthy engagement with the world, we see the world as a place where we can progress, learn and grow. We are ‘built’ to grow in our skilled engagement with the world, and are happy and engaged only to the extent that we succeed in doing so.


Causal manipulation of feed-forward and recurrent processing differentially affects measures of consciousness

Christopher Allen, Tommaso Viola, Elizabeth Irvine, Jemma Sedgmond, Heidi Castle, Richard Gray, Christopher D Chambers — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7475771, CC BY 4.0.

It has been theorized that cortical feed-forward and recurrent neural activity support unconscious and conscious cognitive processes, respectively. Here we causally tested this proposition by applying event-related transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) at early and late times relative to visual stimuli, together with a pulse designed to suppress conscious detection. Consistent with pre-registered hypotheses, early TMS affected residual, reportedly ‘unseen’ capacity. However, conscious perception also appeared critically dependent upon feed-forward processing to a greater extent than the later recurrent phase. Additional exploratory analyses suggested that these early effects dissociated from top-down criterion measures, which were most affected by later TMS. These findings are inconsistent with a simple dichotomy where feed-forward and recurrent processes correspond to unconscious and conscious mechanisms. Instead, different components of awareness may correspond to different phases of cortical dynamics in which initial processing is broadly perceptual whereas later recurrent processing might relate to decision to report.

HighlightsDisruption of feed-forward activity affected conscious and unconscious processing more than later interference.Exploratory analysis indicated later interference changes response criteria.Feed-forward/recurrent processing might better reflect perception/report than unconsciousness/consciousness.


Introduction

One of the most influential functional descriptions of how and when consciousness manifests in the human brain is the suggestion that the initial feed-forward and later recurrent sweeps of activity support unconscious and conscious processing, respectively (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Lamme et al. 2000; Lamme 2001, 2006a). Correlational evidence links early electrophysiological visual components to reportedly ‘unseen’ masked stimuli (Fahrenfort et al. 2007). However, direct causal evidence, involving a manipulation of ‘unseen’ capacity, is lacking though there have been unsuccessful attempts to manipulate it (Koivisto et al. 2011; Koenig and Ro 2019). Disruption of cortical activity very early on, relative to stimuli presentation, has not been shown to interfere with unconscious perception, as would be expected under Lamme’s theory. Conscious awareness of stimuli, by contrast, not only correlates with the presence of later field potential activity (Lamme et al. 1999) but interference with relatively late (>∼100 ms) visual cortical activity using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has repeatedly been shown to suppress conscious awareness (Amassian et al. 1989; Allen et al. 2014). Where such a suppression dissociates from preserved ‘unseen’ perceptual capacity, regardless of TMS onset time, it is known as TMS-induced blindsight (Ro et al. 2004; Boyer et al. 2005; Jolij and Lamme 2005; Allen et al. 2014), which can also be interpreted as a form of unconscious perception. The aim of the current experiment was to determine the relationship between feed-forward/recurrent activity and conscious/unconscious processing using TMS to differentially interfere with early and later processing. This involved applying TMS at different times, relative to the presentation of stimuli, where TMS applied early disrupted feed-forward processing to a greater extent than when TMS was applied at later times.

In addition to being suggested as critical for conscious processing in general, recurrent activity has been predicted more specifically to be important for so-called ‘phenomenal’ consciousness (see Block 2005; page 498), but to date this proposal lacks empirical support. Although notoriously difficult to define, phenomenal consciousness is associated with the ‘what it is like’ experiential aspect of consciousness (Block 2011). Phenomenal consciousness is supposed to be (potentially) distinct from access and reportability. The most commonly cited examples used in support of phenomenal consciousness are paradigms based on the work of Sperling (1960), in which participants report having been consciously aware of display items (e.g. an array of letters) the content of which they cannot access or report (precisely which letters were displayed) unless cued. This has been interpreted as evidence of participants having been phenomenally conscious of a rich scene, but where working memory constraints limits the amount they can access and report at any one time. The measures in our experiment were designed to track the same response types as found in the Sperling task, and in particular the case where participants acknowledge conscious phenomenal awareness of stimuli but fail to perform a forced choice discrimination associated with it, indicating a lack of working memory capacity or access (see Materials and Methods section). By measuring the proportion of such responses during TMS-induced disruption of recurrent processing, we sought to put Block’s (2007) prediction to the test.

Our study thus tested three pre-registered hypotheses. First, consistent with previous observations (Ro et al. 2004; Boyer et al. 2005; Jolij and Lamme 2005; Allen et al. 2014), our baseline hypothesis was that occipital TMS applied at 110 ms post-stimulus onset should suppress conscious perception while residual, reportedly ‘unseen’ perceptual discrimination would remain above chance. Our primary experimental hypothesis was that an additional TMS pulse applied during the early feed-forward sweep should disrupt ‘unseen’ discrimination sensitivity to a greater extent when compared with later TMS. Finally, our secondary hypothesis was that an additional TMS pulse applied during later processing should disrupt ‘phenomenal’ consciousness to a greater extent than earlier TMS.


Materials and Methods


Overview

The methods described here match those pre-registered (https://osf.io/d7uik/), where any deviations, aside from tense and clarifications, have been made explicit. All procedures received ethical approval from the Cardiff University, School of Psychology ethics committee in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki. Data, analysis programmes and copies of stimulus materials are available at https://osf.io/dwfqv/.


Participants

Seventy-nine participants attended an initial session all of whom had passed initial TMS safety screening (Maizey et al. 2013). Fifty participants (22.4 mean age ±3.2 SD range 19–37, 34 female) went on to complete the full experiment which involved between 8 and 12 h of testing over 3–8 sessions separate by at least 24 h. Of the 79 participants who initially signed up for the experiment, 13 did not continue to the main experiment owing to inability to perceive phosphenes within safety limits, a further 4 participants did not take part owning to large or uncomfortable facial twitches, 12 withdrew voluntarily (see Exclusion criteria section).


Design

One common strategy to probe consciousness is to contrast measures that track conscious awareness of stimuli against perceptual measures where awareness is lacking in some way – with the difference between them revealing what might be involved in consciousness (Lau and Passingham 2006). Blindsight, in various forms, is an archetypical example of this dissociation. Our paradigm was designed to measure conscious and unconscious perception and be capable of demonstrating dissociations between these measures. Arrow target stimuli were presented against luminance noise on half of all trials. Of the remaining trials, half (25% of total) contained a non-arrow stimulus and half contained only noise (stimuli absent). Following each presentation subjects were asked three questions: ‘Did you consciously see the arrow? (Yes or No)’, ‘Did you see something? (Yes or No)’ and ‘Was it pointing Left or Right?. Participants were instructed to respond positively to the ‘arrow’ question if they are aware of the arrow and to respond positively to the ‘something’ question if they were aware of either the arrow or the non-arrow being present. Additionally, they were instructed to use the ‘something?’ question to indicate any awareness they felt they had of the stimuli possibly being present. In this way, the ‘something?’ question was designed to reflect a lower level of awareness than the ‘arrow?’ question. With respect to the left/right discrimination, participants were also instructed to offer their best guess as to the direction of the arrow, irrespective of whether or not they believed the arrow is present. Responses were unspeeded. Full task instructions can be found in and were available to participants in each session. In addition to pre-registered procedures, verbal instructions were regularly repeated to participants, especially if the participant expressed some confusion with respect to making a directional decision on the basis of what they believed to be an absence of information, as was often encountered. The content and structure of these instructions were largely maintained in order to minimize variability between experimenters who collected data (C.A., J.S., T.V., H.C.), where participants were told ‘If you see it say you saw it, if you don’t say “no” and always try your best on the left/right decision even if you don’t think anything was presented’.

Previous research has shown that applying TMS at around 110 ms post-stimulus onset is effective in producing TMS-induced suppression awareness (Amassian et al. 1989) and blindsight (Boyer et al. 2005; Allen et al. 2014). The primary intervention of this experiment was the application of TMS at this time and to combine this with the application of additional single pulses on the same trials either before or after this pulse, termed the ‘Blindsight Inducing Pulse’ (BIP). The term BIP is used for consistency with the pre-registered protocol. However, as it transpired, the data did not indicate a complete dissociation between conscious perception and reportedly ‘unseen’ discrimination, so should not be interpreted as producing blindsight (see Results section). The BIP was experimentally necessary as previous research (Allen 2012; Allen et al. 2014; Koenig and Ro 2019) and piloting indicated that single pulse TMS, or pairs of TMS pulses in rapid succession, are largely ineffective in changing residual ‘Unseen’ discrimination. The BIP therefore enabled us to probe the primary experimental hypotheses. As the BIP interferes with later recurrent processing, and also because all TMS effects only carry forward in time, the differences between temporal intervention conditions are relative ones, in which early feed-forward processing is disrupted to a greater extent when TMS is additionally applied before the BIP, in comparison to when it is applied after the BIP. The times chosen for these additional pulses were at 30, 70, 150 and 190 ms from stimulus onset. This meant that there were five temporal TMS conditions, one where the BIP was applied in isolation to demonstrate a TMS-induced suppression of awareness while residual ‘unseen’, potentially above-chance, discrimination might be demonstrated, and four in which pairs of pulses were applied at the BIP and additional times designed to target different stages of processing. When TMS was applied at the BIP (110 ms) and at 30 or 70 ms, the data relatively probed the role of the early feed-forward sweep, whereas TMS applied at the BIP (110 ms) and at 150 and 190 ms informed the role of recurrent processing. The use of two time points before and two time points after the BIP was intended to increase the likelihood of affecting processing. It also allowed for the examination of the time course of any disruption with greater accuracy than would be possible if only one additional TMS pulse was administered before or after the BIP. These finer granularity time points were only examined when appreciable differences between early versus late interventions were observed.

Each participant completed 12 blocks of active TMS and 12 blocks of control (sham) TMS, each consisting of 80 trials. Each participant therefore completed 1920 experimental trials. As there were four stimulus conditions (left arrow, right arrow, non-arrow and stimulus absent) and five temporal TMS conditions (BIP in isolation, 30ms&BIP, 70ms&BIP, BIP&150ms and BIP&190ms), each block contained four repetitions of each unique condition, the order of which was randomized. The number of blocks completed on any single day of data collection varied according to factors such as participants’ availability.

The control condition was sham stimulation in which the coil is placed over the target region but oriented such that the magnetic flux entering the scalp is minimal. Blinding to this control was attempted; although participants are often aware of the differences between active and sham TMS. Since the central questions of this investigation involved contrasting two active TMS conditions (early vs. late effects), this temporal control makes the issue of ineffective blinding less problematic than is the case with the majority of sham controlled experiments. Due to the large area affected by a round TMS coil (Roth et al. 1991), and the possible involvement of a wide range of areas in the processes under investigation, vertex or other site-based controls were not suitable.

There were six possible orders in which the experimental questions could be presented, all of which were used over the course of the experiment. A single order of questions was maintained throughout each block and participants completed four consecutive blocks of the same question order before a new order was applied. The order in which the six question orders were applied was randomized for each participant. When each new question order was introduced, participants were given 10 practice trials to familiarize themselves with the task. These practice trials were not analysed. An equal number of active and control blocks were completed for each question order, resulting in six possible active/control orders per question order. Each participant completed a full set of active/control orders and these were randomized for each participant independently of question order.


Measures

Non-parametric signal detection theory was applied to derive a measure of conscious detection. describes the conscious detection measure (PrC) in terms of signal detection theory classes (Macmillan et al. 1990; Corwin 1994). This is the non-parametric equivalent of detection dʹ. The measure of conscious detection also takes account of reflective reports made by participants following their participation in an almost identical task (Allen et al. 2014). That is, the allocation of response patterns to signal detection categories was informed by reports made by participants about their experience of the task (Varela 1996). For example, responding negatively to the ‘arrow?’ question and positively to the ‘something?’ question in the presence of a non-arrow was classed as a ‘correct rejection’, as opposed to a ‘hit’, because participants felt the primary way they approached the task was the detection of the arrows, not detection of the non-arrows. Reportedly ‘unseen’ sensitivity (PcU) was quantified by Left/Right discrimination capacity when participants respond negatively to both the ‘arrow?’ and ‘something?’ questions (Cheesman and Merikle 1987; Dienes 2004). This measure was therefore composed of trials where participants had twice reported the stimuli as ‘unseen’ and where residual perceptual sensitivity was indicated by left/right performance being greater than chance at 50% (PcU > 0.5).

A central aim of this experiment was to assess if and how reportedly ‘unseen’ discrimination capacity was affected by TMS applied at different times. However, if a participant were to have demonstrated no evidence of residual ‘unseen’ capacity in baseline conditions, then the central question would have been unanswerable when applied to their data. Therefore, an amendment was made, early in the data collection (https://osf.io/x9pig/), to apply additional criteria in which participants were excluded from the analysis involving PcU, if they did not demonstrate evidence of baseline (sham) ‘unseen’ capacity. Individual PcU performance in the sham condition (across TMS time conditions) was assessed relative to chance using a one-tailed z-test based upon a cumulative normal distribution, where chance is PcU = 0.5, the number of trials contributing to PcU measures was the ‘n’ coefficient and alpha was 0.05. If a participant’s ‘unseen’ performance was not greater than chance, then they were excluded from the analysis of PcU only. This resulted in the removal of eight participants.

The primary hypothesis was tested by the analyses of changes in the PcU and PrC measures. To probe the secondary hypothesis an additional measure (PCm) was developed, to reflect the presence of ‘phenomenal’ consciousness relative to conscious access. The intention here was not to question Block’s proposed conceptual distinction, but rather to probe an empirically tractable prediction made by Block with respect to phenomenal consciousness. Block appeals to several conditions which express phenomenal consciousness in isolation, but the example most often cited in recent works are the experiments conducted by Sperling (e.g. Sperling 1960, cited in Block 2007). In these experiments, participants are shown an array of (typically 12) letters for a brief period of time, of which they acknowledge awareness (they state that they saw an array of letters). Participants can generally only freely identify 3–4 letters out of each display. However, given a post-stimulus cue to any of the rows in the display, subjects can identify the letters in that row. According to Block, this suggests that participants are phenomenally conscious of all the specific letters in the array, but cannot access information about all of them at any one time, due to working memory constraints. A specific prediction made by Block is that this behavioural manifestation of phenomenal conscious will be accompanied by recurrent processing (Block 2007, page 498). If this is so, then the current experiment is a valid way of testing whether recurrent processing is associated with phenomenal consciousness through the demonstration of expressions of phenomenal consciousness and the manipulation of recurrent processing.

The PCm was designed to follow the similarities between the current experimental configuration and the interpretation of the Sperling experiments by Block (2007), using detection without identification as an appropriate measure of phenomenal consciousness in contrast and relative to conscious access [which Block (2012), still seems to support]. The numerator of the PCm was acknowledged awareness, indicated by positive responses to both detection questions, while the directional discrimination judgement was made incorrectly and the denominator was all arrow present trials, see for further details.

In addition to the primary measures (PrC and PcU), the same Signal Detection Theory (SDT) classes could be used to drive a measure of bias (BrC) which was applied as an exploratory measure, where BrC = False Alarm Rate/(1-PrC) (Corwin 1994). This is the bias component of the primary conscious detection sensitivity measure (PrC).

Following a reviewer’s suggestion, it may be informative to quantify sensitivity and criteria to the ‘Arrow?’ and ‘Something?’ questions separately. The allocation of the signal detection classes for these measures is described in. Pr (sensitivity) and Br (criteria) measures (PrA, PrS, BrA and BrS where A stands for Arrow and S stands for Something) were derived through the application of non-parametric signal detection theory and identical analyses were applied as with all other exploratory measures.


Calibration

Prior to the experimental sessions, participants attended a threshold session where, following a period of familiarization with the task, the stimuli were calibrated by adjusting the luminance of the target to produce a PrC level of 0.5 used in the subsequent experimental session. This involved generating a psychophysical function of each participant’s conscious detection performance over a range of stimuli luminance intensities, which could then be solved for a PrC level of 0.5. Each data point in this function was the result of performance over a mini block consisting of 20 trials. Once the participants’ specific luminance was established, a number of additional mini blocks were completed to ensure stability. If a fluctuation in PrC performance was observed beyond a criterion level of ±0.1 PrC units then small adjustments were made according to the psychophysical function such that performance was maintained at a PrC of ≈0.5. At the start of each experimental session, participants also completed a mini training block and similar adjustments were made as required. This session-specific updating of baseline stimulus levels was designed to lessen the impact of day-to-day variation in task performance. Each active TMS block was accompanied by a sham block in which the luminance of the targets was equal. When more than two blocks were completed within a single experimental session the participants’ performance over the control block served as equivalent to a mini block and so indicated whether an adjustment of the stimuli should be made for subsequent blocks.

During the threshold session, participants were also screened for suitability for TMS (see Maizey et al. 2013) and a phosphene threshold (PT) obtained (Franca et al. 2006). The method used here resembled that of Franca et al., (2006) and has been previously described (Allen et al. 2014, https://osf.io/d7uik/).


Equipment

TMS was administered with a Magstim high-power 90-mm round coil in conjunction with a Magstim Rapid2 biphasic stimulator. Pulse delivery was controlled via a Cambridge Research Systems (CRS) Visage running Real Time Sequencer software on a Matlab platform, which also governed stimulus presentation on a gamma-corrected 21” Mitsubishi CRT monitor (100 Hz vertical refresh rate) at a viewing distance of 720 mm. To expand upon the stimuli details described in the pre-registration document: each trial commenced with a 1500 ms fixation period, followed by the onset of the luminance noise, consisting of each bar in the matrix pseudo-randomly alternating in luminance (range 25 candela/m2, white noise distribution) every 20 ms. After 800 ms the stimuli or a noise frame (stimulus absent) appeared for 20 ms as an addition to the noise of a uniform increase in luminance, the level of which was determined according to the participants calibration. This followed by a further 400 ms of noise before the questions were displayed. The noise occupied 1.9° of visual angle and the stimuli subtended to 0.8° × 1.4°.

TMS pulses in the experimental sessions were delivered at 120% of participants PT. If participants expressed discomfort during the threshold session when TMS was applied at 120% of PT the TMS intensity was reduced to 110% of PT. Three participants received stimulation at 110% of PT. The mean level of absolute stimulation intensity as a proportion of maximum stimulator output was 78.0% ± 13.7 SD. It is possible, as with almost all TMS experiments involving online suppression of visual capacity, that phosphenes could mask the stimuli. However, the time course of the widely reported effects of TMS applied to the visual cortex is difficult to reconcile with the notion of the phosphene, rather than the simpler interpretation that the TMS itself, acts as a mask. Furthermore, even if phosphene were to mask the stimuli, this should not dramatically alter the interpretation of the experiment.

The TMS coil was oriented with the handle pointing upwards and side ‘B’ facing the participant, so that the induced current passed initially in a left-to-right direction. Coil positioning was initially based on anatomical proximity to the calcarine sulcus, localized in individual structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging scans. Immediately prior to each TMS block, the intensity was set to 130% of PT and the coil was moved so that it produced a phosphene that the participant reported as being ‘reasonably clear’ and, ‘at least in part, covering the centre of their visual field’ with their eyes closed. The coil position was then recorded using a Brainsight system (Rogue Research Inc.) and used for the subsequent block of trials. If the participant was observed to have moved beyond a 5 mm tolerance of the original coil position, indicated by the brainsight system, then the block was paused and the coil repositioned to the recorded site. An approximation of this position was used in the sham condition but with the coil perpendicular to the scalp so that the rim pointed towards the head, and with a 10.6-mm plastic spacer inserted between the scalp and coil to replicate the contact artefact.

To exclude effects of TMS-induced blinks on performance, eye tracking was undertaken throughout the experiment using a CRS chin-rest-mounted infrared eye tracker (250 Hz). Trials were excluded on the basis of blinks identified by a shift in pupil position (>1°) followed by a transitory (<1 s) loss of pupil signal, coincident with the stimulus presentation. This resulted in the exclusion of 205 out of 96 000 trials. One block for one participant was excluded from the pupillometry analyses due to a data saving error.


Statistical analyses

The first question posed in the analysis was whether the BIP in isolation produced a blindsight-type effect. This was to be demonstrated by a significant suppression of conscious detection during active TMS relative to sham, while concurrent ‘unseen’ performance was above chance and ideally maintained. A paired t-test was used to compare active to sham PrC performance, and a one sample t-test was used to compare PcU performance to chance (PcU≈0.5) in the active condition. A series of corresponding Bayesian analyses were also implemented (see below). PcU performance was also tested for the effects of TMS using a paired t-test. If PcU performance over the BIP was suppressed by the TMS, in addition to PrC, then this lessened the extent to which the observed phenomena was classified as a form of blindsight because the dissociation between the two measures (PcU and PrC) would be incomplete. However, such a demonstration did not negate the ability of the experiment to demonstrate other temporally bound effects of the TMS, such as the temporal dynamics of unconscious vision.

The main analysis of this experiment involved the PcU measure: comparing the effects of TMS applied before versus after the BIP. Using the sham-normalized data, a paired t-test compared data collected when TMS was applied before the BIP (PcU Δ sham mean of 30ms&BIP and 70ms&BIP) to when it was applied afterward (PcU Δ sham mean of BIP&150ms and BIP&190ms).

A number of additional analyses were implemented to investigate the effects of the TMS timing on measures with the finer resolution (e.g. comparing the effects of 30ms&BIP to the effects of 190ms&BIP). These analyses were only to be implemented if the primary analyses, described above, warranted their application through the demonstration of reliable effects (P < 0.05 or B >3 or <1/3, see below).

For all proposed paired t-tests, corresponding Bayesian analyses were implemented (Dienes 2008, 2011, Gallistel 2009; Rouder et al. 2009). As described (https://osf.io/x9pig/) measures were assessed relative to a sham TMS baseline and concerned a comparison between the temporal TMS conditions. Small changes were therefore more probable than larger changes within a potential range of fluctuations from sham. Bayesian tests applied to temporal comparisons were based upon half normal priors, starting at zero, whose variance was equal to half of the mean difference between the orthogonal active/sham conditions. Bayesian tests using such priors are relatively assumption free and therefore conservative, defaults. This was the main test applied to temporal order effects and the resultant Bayes Factor is described as BFmain.

As the PrC measures had a maximum range of 0.5 (from threshold level of 0.5 to 0) this was used as the upper limit for prior uniform distributions representing the current hypothesis (see Dienes 2008). The range of the prior representing any changes to PcU spanned from the peak value, irrespective of TMS conditions, to chance levels at 50% correct and the resultant Bayes Factors are denoted as BFuni. In addition to pre-registered tests we applied a Bayesian test with a default JZS prior (BFjzs) as has become standard practice (Rouder et al. 2009). This applied a default scaling factor of 0.707 in line with standard recommendations but representing the expectation of a large/medium effect size in all applications. These tests were applicable to both change from sham and temporal comparisons tests. With respect to the temporal comparisons, owing to the double baselining (active vs. sham and early vs. late) and consequent reduction in effect size, it is noted that these are conservative tests.

By implementing these Bayesian statistics we were justified in continuing to collect data until either substantial support for the hypothesis was obtained (BFmain ≥ 3) or, conversely, substantial support for the null was obtained (BFmain ≤ 1/3, Jeffreys 1961; Dienes 2011). Therefore, only when either of these conditions were satisfied (B >3 or <1/3), for the primary analysis of PcU comparing early and late effects, conventional t-tests were implemented, reported and data collection terminated (July 2018). Where comparisons of active to sham TMS were required, the vector representing the effect for each dependent measure was active minus sham, and a hypothesized suppression was represented by a negative prior. If comparison between early and late effects was required and the prediction was for an earlier suppression then the vector was as follows: (active 30ms&BIP minus sham 30ms&BIP, active 70ms&BIP minus sham 70ms&BIP) minus (active BIP&150ms minus sham BIP&150ms, active BIP&190ms minus sham BIP&190ms), which was integrated with a negative prior. If the hypothesis was for a later effect, then this same vector was integrated with a positive prior. Additionally, priors with the opposing directionality were implemented to assess potential unpredicted effects.

In terms of phenomenal consciousness, the main question was whether or not the measure of phenomenal consciousness (PCm) was suppressed when TMS was applied relatively late compared to earlier applications. The same structure of tests applied to the PcU measure was also appropriate for this PCm analysis. However, as the PCm measure was, as far as we are aware, completely novel, its range and variance could not be easily predicted a priori although the half normal approach described above was applicable. Because it is possible that the BIP in isolation may have been sufficient to disrupt recurrent processing and therefore suppress phenomenal consciousness, an active versus sham set of analyses was implemented comparing active BIP versus sham BIP and active versus sham where data were collapsed across temporal interventions and comprised of t-test’s and Bayesian analyses using the same prior structure as described for the early versus late analyses.

Only if the primary analysis of PCm effects (Δ sham early vs. late TMS) demonstrated reliable effects (P < 0.05 or B >3 or <1/3) were further analyses to be implemented in order to investigate alternative explanations. As no such effects were observed, anticipated further analysis was not implemented but the details can be found at https://osf.io/d7uik/.


Exclusion criteria

Participants were (to be) excluded according to the following criteria:

If a participant were to have persistently pressed the same left/right button when they were reflectively unaware of the stimuli, then this strategy would have negated the purpose of the experiment and they would have been excluded from the analyses. This strategy would have been identified by the same left/right discussion being made on 75% or more of the ‘unseen’ trials. No participants were excluded on this basis.

If a participant were to have responded negatively to all yes/no questions when under a specific experimental condition (such as active TMS) they would have been excluded, as this would have indicated that their responses were the result of expectation rather than experimental manipulation (Ericsson 2003). No participants were excluded on this basis.

If a participant were to give illogical responses (i.e. reporting ‘yes’ to the ‘arrow?’ question and ‘no’ to the ‘something?’ question) on greater than 2.5% of trials, they were to be excluded. One participant was excluded on this basis. As they were only identifiable on the basis of a complete data set, unlike other exclusions, they were included in the 50 reported to have completed the experiment.

If coil repositioning, due to subject’s movement, was required on 50% or more of active TMS blocks, the participants data were to be excluded.

Other unanticipated technical error may have led to the loss of data and therefore the exclusion of participants.

Statistical outliers at the participant level were identified and excluded using Chauvenet’s criteria (Taylor 1997). This was applied to each of the critical analyses described above (t-test and Bayesian analysis) for each measure separately. This exclusion therefore only pertained to the measures in question, rather than the removal of the participant's data from all analyses as with other criteria in this section. The application of Chauvenet’s criteria involves describing each analysis as a single vector (as with the Bayesian analysis above). If the likelihood of any data point on that vector, times the number of data points, was <0.5 then that data point was to be excluded from the analysis in question only. Likelihood was defined as the location on a probability distribution function representative of the vector in question. See for related exclusions.

Participants may have withdrawn voluntarily from the experiment for any reason.


Results

Consistent with our baseline hypothesis, TMS applied in isolation at 110 ms after stimulus onset (the BIP) produced evidence of a significant suppression of conscious detection (active vs. sham PrC, T(48) = −3.03, P = 0.004, mean = −0.08, 95% CI [−0.13, −0.03], d = 0.43, BFuni = 12.46, BFjzs = 8.44) while ‘unseen’ discrimination (PcU) remained above chance (with pre-registered exclusions T(40) = 6.82, P = 3.33 × 10−8, mean = 0.65, 95% CI [0.61, 0.69], d = 1.07, BFuni = 2.97 × 109, BFjzs = 4.12 × 105, without exclusions T(49) = 6.91, P = 9.07 × 10−9, mean = 0.65, 95% CI [0.61, 0.70], d = 0.98, BFuni = 6.51 × 109, BFjzs = 1.38 × 106). However, an exploratory analysis also indicated that the BIP also suppressed PcU compared to sham (T(40) = −2.70, P = 0.01, mean = −0.09, 95% CI [−0.15, −0.02], d = 0.42, BFjzs = 3.97). Although above chance perception in the presence of twice-denied awareness was demonstrated, a complete dissociation of TMS effects between PrC and PcU was not observed, which lessens the extent to which the phenomena might be understood as a form of Blindsight. This may be consistent with previous studies, which have also failed to show a complete dissociation between conscious and residual perceptual capacity (Koivisto et al. 2012; Railo et al. 2012, Lloyd et al. 2013; Hurme et al. 2017).

The primary question of this study was whether ‘unseen’ discrimination was suppressed to a greater extent by early TMS compared with late TMS. This hypothesis was supported, albeit weakly in the initial analyses which collapsed data across the two early and two late interventions (PcU Δ sham early vs. late T(40) = −1.93, P = 0.06, BFmain = 3.82, BFuni = 1.20, BFjzs = 0.90, see and). Further pre-registered analyses in which individual TMS onset latencies are analysed separately revealed strong evidence that TMS applied at the earliest time (30 ms) suppressed PcU compared to its later TMS counterpart at 190 ms (T(40) = −3.57, P = 9.39 × 10−4, mean = 0.08, 95% CI [0.34, 0.12], d = 0.56, BFmain = 89.37, BFuni = 135.95, BFjzs = 32.05). This finding supports the primary hypothesis that residual ‘unseen’ discrimination depends upon the early feed-forward sweep of activity (Lamme et al. 2000).

However, contrary to the theory relating conscious awareness to later recurrent processing (Lamme et al. 2000), conscious detection was also suppressed to a greater extent by early TMS compared to late TMS (PrC Δ sham early (30 and 70 ms) versus late (150 and 190 ms) T(48) = 4.17, P = 1.25 × 10−4, mean = −0.06, 95% CI [−0.08, −0.03], d = 0.60, BFmain(early>late) = 0.05, BFmain(late>early) = 1.73 × 103, BFuni(late>early) = 408.90, BFjzs = 187.88, see and). A direct correspondence between feed-forward/recurrent processing and unconscious/conscious perception was therefore not observed.

The measure of ‘phenomenal’ consciousness (PCm) was higher under active conditions compared to sham (across times T(47) = 2.02, P = 0.049, mean = 3.97 × 10−3, 95% CI [0.13, 7.91] × 10−3, d = 0.29 BFjzs = 1.01), but not significantly for the BIP in isolation (T(47) = 0.91, P = 0.37, mean = 3.50 × 10−3, 95% CI [−0.00, 0.01], d = 0.13, BFjzs = 0.23). This secondary analysis indicated that participants were more likely to acknowledge awareness of the arrow but report its direction incorrectly during occipital versus sham TMS. Such errors, under Block’s interpretation, can be understood as failures of access consciousness and, therefore, a relative elevation of phenomenal consciousness as indicated by the acknowledgment of awareness. Exploratory analyses indicated that these trends were preserved and their statistical reliability elevated when contributing trial numbers were increased as the alternative measures of ‘phenomenal’ consciousness were applied (see and Methods: Measures). However, the pre-registered analysis revealed no clear evidence that later TMS changed PCm more than early TMS (PCm Δ sham early vs. late T(47) = 0.33, P = 0.74, BFmain(early>late) = 0.91, BFmain(late>early) = 0.64, BFjzs = 0.17, see and). Therefore, these results did not support the secondary hypothesis that phenomenal consciousness is supported by recurrent processing.

In addition to pre-registered analyses, our design allowed us to derive an exploratory measure of response criterion (BrC), quantifying the participant driven tendency to respond to questions about awareness (Macmillan and Creelman 1990). Recently, response bias has been highlighted as a measure of interest with respect to top-down influences and subjective qualities (Peters et al. 2016). Across times there was no clear evidence that participants were any more likely to report awareness irrespective of stimuli under active TMS conditions compared to sham (T(46) = 1.41, P = 0.17, mean = 0.02, 95% CI [−0.01, 0.05], d = 0.20, BFjzs = 0.40). However, in contrast to both primary perceptual measures, which were affected by early TMS, the criterion measure was affected by the application of later TMS compared to early TMS (BrC Δ sham early vs. late T(46) = −2.16, P = 0.036, BFmain(early>late) = 0.34, BFmain(late>early) = 3.59, BFjzs = 1.31, see and). This indicates that participants were more likely to report awareness independently of what was presented, or had a lower criterion, when active TMS was applied at a later time. Additional exploratory measures are considered in.

and illustrate the exploratory measures of sensitivity and criteria applied to the ‘Arrow?’ and ‘Something?’ questions in isolation. These broadly follow the patterns exhibited in the primary PrC and BrC measures. Potential effects on criteria are slightly reduced in magnitude compared to BrC, likely owing to the reduction in the number of trials contributing to each measure. One noteworthy difference between the BrA and BrS measures is that propensity to respond positively to the ‘Something?’ question is markedly higher than that for the ‘Arrow?’ question under the active TMS condition question, which is to be expected given that the ‘Something?’ question is intended to reflect a lower level of awareness. It may also indicate that this difference in criteria could be attributed to the lower threshold applied in response to the ‘Something?’ question, and its susceptibility to TMS indicates that it may be a useful adjunct to future applications of related paradigms. Alternatively, this difference between the BrA and BrS measures to TMS, across times, could be the result of participants misinterpreting phosphenes as some form of stimulus, or the TMS introducing some other form of uncertainty.


Discussion


Primary hypotheses and measures

Our results support the hypothesis that the early feed-forward sweep of occipital activity supports ‘unseen’ capacity (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000) but are inconsistent with the hypothesis that consciousness is supported by later recurrent processing. Although there is ample evidence that conscious awareness is associated with later recurrent processing (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Sergent et al. 2005; Pitts et al. 2014), there is also evidence linking early components of activity with awareness (Mathewson et al. 2009; Railo et al. 2011). Here we predicted that later intervention would cause a suppression of the conscious perception measure, but the data indicated that conscious perception also critically depend on early activity. A proponent of the classic theory linking conscious processing to recurrent activity would likely argue that this is to be expected, as the later recurrent phase is dependent upon the initial forward sweep of information. The feed-forward sweep could therefore be understood as enabling or preparatory (Marr 1982; Allen et al. 2014) rather than constitutive of conscious awareness, and so disruption of the feed-forward input could be expected to interfere with later conscious processing, particularly as TMS effects only carry forward in time. In this way, the later phase might still constitute the conscious process. However, such a distinction between merely enabling conscious processing and constituting it is difficult to maintain. Our data suggest that conscious detection depends upon early processing to a greater extent than on later processing, suggesting that early feed-forward activity may play a more important causal role. If this is so, it is difficult to see why early activity should not be as tightly associated with conscious perception as later recurrent activity.

Residual ‘unseen’ capacity has appeared to be resilient to TMS interventions (Boyer et al. 2005; Allen 2012; Allen et al. 2014; Koenig and Ro 2019), although one study has reported perturbation with TMS at 60 ms post-stimulus (Hurme et al. 2017). The resilience of residual capacity, together with the evocation of TMS-induced blindsight, motivated the application of the BIP on all trials, which, in combination with relatively high trial numbers and sample sizes, allowed us to map the temporal dependencies of ‘unseen’ sensitivity. However, TMS pulses carry their effects forward in time and the presence of the BIP meant that, to some extent, recurrent activity was interfered with under all active conditions. The difference between early and late conditions is therefore a relative one. Recurrent processing is affected in all conditions, but the effects on conscious detection and ‘unseen’ sensitivity were affected to a greater extent when early feed-forward processing was disrupted compared to TMS applied later on.

Both conscious detection and ‘unseen’ discrimination sensitivity appeared to be most susceptible to early interventions, and both were susceptible to the BIP in isolation. Whilst the susceptibility of ‘unseen’ discrimination to interventions can in part be attributed to relatively well numerated data, it also possibly suggests that they are supported by a common perceptual mechanism and differences between these two measures could be interpreted as differences in subjective thresholds and approaches to the task (Peters and Lau 2015).


Criteria measures of consciousness

The effects of TMS upon criterion/bias dissociated temporally from the primary measures, with later TMS, as opposed to early TMS, being the more effective intervention. How then is bias, and the kind of false alarm error which drives it, to be understood? Bias, operationalized as the propensity to report awareness, might reflect a form of awareness that is independent of perception, and the contrast between bias (also understood as subjective criterion) and objective perception could be fruitful in uncovering the top-down, dispositional and subjective aspects of consciousness (Peters et al. 2016). If the criterion measure tracks some form of subjective awareness or interpretation, the later TMS effects could support Lamme’s framework. Indeed, under the ‘neural stance’ (Lamme 2006a) the measure of criterion should be understood as relating to consciousness to a greater extent than the detection measures precisely because it is affected by later TMS, although such a position could be criticized for circularity (Kouider et al. 2010).

Until now, relatively few examples of dissociations involving criterion have received attention, and investigations have more commonly focused on the problems of bias and the need to remove criterion from measures (Snodgrass et al. 2004; Lloyd et al. 2013; Balsdon and Azzopardi 2015). Although there are circumstances where removing subjective criteria is useful (e.g. when comparing perception across individuals or looking at changes in strategy over time), when the focus of the enquiry relates to consciousness, removing the subjective element could be counterproductive (Lau 2008). Although exploratory, the current observations of a causal, temporal dissociation where perceptual measures are affected early and bias was affected later (cf. vs.) has the potential to inform our understanding of conscious processes. Later TMS increased reported awareness independently of perception. Whether this lowering of criterion by later TMS is the result of suppression of the threshold for entry into consciousness (i.e. disruption of suppression) or corresponds to mistakes in interpreting noisy percepts, is unclear based on the current data and may be an area for future replication and investigation. However, it does seem that the later effects relate to a high-order effect upon the conscious report, rather than the perceptual or access system, involving a disposition to report awareness independently of the stimuli.


Phenomenal measures

With respect to the ‘phenomenal’ measures, the hypothesis that an additional TMS pulse applied during later processing should disrupt ‘phenomenal’ consciousness to a greater extent than earlier TMS was not supported. The measures of phenomenal consciousness did not show a temporal dissociation. However, as described in our pre-registered protocol (https://osf.io/d7uik/), TMS applied at the BIP and therefore under all active TMS conditions, may have disrupted recurrent processing (Lamme 2006b). If so the current findings that participants are more likely to exhibit responses consistent with relative phenomenal consciousness without access consciousness, in the context of disrupted recurrent activity, may be difficult to reconcile with Block’s theory.

However, we acknowledge that our characterization of ‘phenomenal’ measures may not reflect the kinds of responses Block intends in his descriptions of phenomenal consciousness. Indeed, it is possible that the apparent richness of phenomenal content corresponds to the detail and granularity of the experimental questions posed and that our questioning procedure failed to capture Block’s intention. An alternative explanation of the data is that under active TMS conditions, aspects of the cognitive processing associated with access consciousness (decision-making, report) are affected such that (as above) participants are in general more likely to report awareness and make an error in, e.g. reporting direction, which inflates the PcM measures. That is, the increase in ‘phenomenal’ measures during disrupted recurrent processing does not mean that there was a higher proportion of cases of phenomenal consciousness without access consciousness, but instead that there was a higher proportion of cases of ‘abnormal’ access reports. In this way, we observe changes in criterion or access that happen to fit the PcM profile. This would not be inconsistent with Block’s claim that recurrent processing is essential for phenomenal consciousness.


Predictive coding interpretation

The observed late effect of TMS on criterion can also be interpreted under, and potentially inform, theories of neural predictive coding. In brief, these theories hold that there are prior sets of predictions, which are then integrated with incoming information according to Bayesian principles, resulting in prediction error or free-energy which the system attempts to minimize. The results of this integration form a posterior which can then become the prior for the subsequent series of events (Friston 2010, Clark 2013). Predictive coding theories are notoriously difficult to falsify owing to their alignment with alternative, well-established theories (e.g. attention or learning, Bowers and Davis 2012). One of the few areas in which there appears to be unique and therefore testable predictions is in the temporal order of events – the prior comes first. The prior, being the state of the system independent of the incoming information, might be seen as most closely resembling the measures of criterion, as it also reflects the tendency to respond independently of incoming information. As criterion was affected at a later time, but the predictive coding framework would suggest its earlier involvement, there is a discrepancy that could be seen as contrary to the framework. Ameliorating explanations are possible. For example, later TMS could affect the integration process resulting in posteriors that are more dependent upon the prior, as opposed to the incoming information, leading to increased false alarms. However, such an effect should have also led to a comparable loss of sensitivity under late TMS, which was not observed, although it is possible that it could have been obscured by the dominance of the early effect. Similarly, prior expectation and report contents might dissociate in other unanticipated ways or the relevant priors may be independent of activity effected by the TMS. Even though these possibilities are speculative interpretations of exploratory results we feel they are informative and worthy of note as they offer avenues for future enquiry and the discrepancy between the simplest interpretation – of top-down criterion relating to the prior – may be contrary to predictive coding, where unique testable predictions are sparse.


Signal detection theory considerations

The range of methods applied to investigate the presence of unconscious processing and related blindsight-type phenomena is a matter of keen debate (Schmidt 2007; Peters et al. 2017). Here the decision was made to place the distinction between presence and absence of awareness in the hands of the participant where the PcU measures drew on responses where participants reported and confirmed an absence of awareness (Cheesman and Merikle 1987; Varela 1996; Weiskrantz 1997; Dienes 2004). Measures relating to the presence of consciousness (PrC and BrC) here, and more widely within the field, centre upon SDT and to some extent the dissociation between sensitivity and criterion justifies the use of SDT. However, we wish to highlight a difficulty with the application of SDT within the context of consciousness research and particularly with respect to confidence or second-order judgements. A central assumption in the application of both classical and second-order SDT is that underlying processes are best described by a pair of distributions where a noise distribution is of comparable magnitude to that of a signal distribution. Yet participants rarely claim awareness of stimuli that were not presented. From an evolutionary perspective, metacognitive systems that minimize drawing from such an error distribution might be successful. This might suggest that the noise distribution should not be assumed to be comparable to that of the signal, especially with respect to second-order judgements. These issues are exacerbated by the parametric normalization applied to the most commonly applied measures in this field (Green and Swets 1966). Such measures are subject to gross distortion by low false alarm rates because normalized metrics approach infinity as false alarm rates tend towards zero (here 111 cells out of 500 contained five or fewer false alarms where there where 96 opportunities for false alarms per cell). The work-around often recommended (Macmillan et al. 1990; Hautus 1995) is the addition of a constant to both hit and false alarm rates, or estimating false alarms rates for participants who did not make false alarms from those that did (Lee 2008; Fleming 2017). Although estimating reports based on other participants is preferable, within the context of consciousness research and epistemically, this work-around is highly problematic. It essentially involves the analyst generating pseudo-responses that participants did not make in order to apply their paradigm of choice. Avoidance of this issue and dependency on the assumption of any particular distribution were motivating factors for the a priori adoption of non-parametric SDT (Corwin 1994). Although some model comparison techniques are limited by the use of non-parametric SDT, the similarity between the primary non-parametric measures applied here (PrC and BrC) and the classical parametric measures (dʹ and c, See) suggests the utility of the parametric assumption may be minimal. We therefore recommend the broader adoption of non-parametric SDT in consciousness research.


Blindsight

This paradigm was designed to be capable of demonstrating blindsight-type phenomena, where blindsight is interpreted as a dissociation (Weiskrantz 1992) between conscious awareness of stimuli and residual (unconscious) perceptual capacity. A potential limitation for this paradigm may be that the residual, reportedly ‘unseen’, capacity cannot be attributed to the TMS intervention, as above chance performance is present at baseline, and therefore is less than perfectly analogous to lesion-based blindsight where the residual capacity is only apparent with the lesion. Furthermore, it is possible that the existence of blindsight and unconscious perception more generally, may be brought into question through the application of a more nuanced, less binary, questioning procedure. The distinction between unconscious and pre-reflective capacity (Petitmengin and Bitbol 2009) and the role of bias in report are important areas for development in future research. The current study, however, did not demonstrate a blindsight-type dissociation. Had the original hypothesis of a temporal dissociation been observed, where PrC would have been affected at later times in comparisons to PcU, then such a pattern may have resembled blindsight. Instead, the temporal dissociation observed between the perceptual and the criteria measures tentatively suggests that feed-forward and recurrent phases more closely reflect perception and report, as opposed to the unconscious and conscious (blindsight) dichotomy.


Conclusions

This investigation sought to investigate the role of feed-forward and recurrent processing in relation to visual consciousness. We found that both measures of reportedly ‘unseen’ perception and conscious detection were affected to the greatest extent by the application of early TMS, indicating that they both critically depend upon early feed-forward processing. Exploratory analysis indicated that these perceptual measures dissociated from criteria-related measures that appeared to be affected by later TMS. These findings suggest that rather than the feed-forward recurrent distinction mapping onto to the difference between conscious and unconscious processing, the most parsimonious interpretation of the current findings is that early visual processing is more perceptual, whereas later recurrent processing relates to top-down, subjective or dispositional aspects of responding.


Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness

Johnjoe McFadden — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7507405, CC BY 4.0.

A key aspect of consciousness is that it represents bound or integrated information, prompting an increasing conviction that the physical substrate of consciousness must be capable of encoding integrated information in the brain. However, as Ralph Landauer insisted, ‘information is physical’ so integrated information must be physically integrated. I argue here that nearly all examples of so-called ‘integrated information’, including neuronal information processing and conventional computing, are only temporally integrated in the sense that outputs are correlated with multiple inputs: the information integration is implemented in time, rather than space, and thereby cannot correspond to physically integrated information. I point out that only energy fields are capable of integrating information in space. I describe the conscious electromagnetic information (cemi) field theory which has proposed that consciousness is physically integrated, and causally active, information encoded in the brain’s global electromagnetic (EM) field. I here extend the theory to argue that consciousness implements algorithms in space, rather than time, within the brain’s EM field. I describe how the cemi field theory accounts for most observed features of consciousness and describe recent experimental support for the theory. I also describe several untested predictions of the theory and discuss its implications for the design of artificial consciousness. The cemi field theory proposes a scientific dualism that is rooted in the difference between matter and energy, rather than matter and spirit.


Introduction

‘Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs’William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet‘What’s the best way to fix a bicycle that has a rope caught in its spokes?’Gary Marcus ‘Deep Learning: A Critical Appraisal’ (Marcus 2018)

The ‘binding problem’ is that of understanding ‘our capacity to integrate information across time, space, attributes, and ideas’ (Treisman 1999) within a conscious mind. The problem is often posed in terms of understanding how the disparate components of a visual scene—colours, textures, lines, motion, etc.—that are processed in distinct regions of the brain are yet brought together to form a unified conscious percept. However, binding is a general feature of consciousness in all its modes. The first text quotation above contains four discordant nouns, one denoting an emotion, the second a dark vapour, the third a noxious smell and the fourth, an utterance. Yet, Shakespeare’s genius bound each word into a single line of poetry that effortlessly evokes, in the conscious mind of the reader or listener, a singular, integrated, yet complex insight into the most tender of human emotions. In the second quotation, artificial intelligence (AI) researcher and pioneer of Deep Learning, Gary Marcus, laments the fact that AI currently lacks this ability, as illustrated by the intractability of problems, such as untangling a rope from the wheel of a bicycle that is, nevertheless, grasped and solved by any infant on her first exposure to the task.

Our subjective experience is that this kind of problem, which involves planning and executing several sequential steps, is nonetheless instantly grasped and solved in its entirety, as integrated information. This intuition is borne out by many studies that demonstrate that the binding provided by consciousness is indeed required to solve general intelligence problems, particularly sequential tasks that require working memory, such as memory trace conditioning (Carter et al. 2006), multi-step calculations (Dehaene and Cohen 2007), goal-directed behaviour and strategic planning (Dehaene and Naccache 2001), learning over time (Fuster 1991), language (but not word) comprehension (Hagoort and Indefrey 2014), social intelligence and interactions (Dunbar et al. 2010; Lieberman 2012) and creativity (Kaufman et al. 2010). As has been pointed out by several researchers (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Treisman; Edelman and Tononi 2008), conscious binding requires the integration of complex information in the brain. The problem is to understand how the brain achieves this integration.


Results


What do we mean by physically integrated information?

‘Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of our language’. Wittgenstein (2009, p. 109).

What do we mean by ‘integrated information’? To answer this question, we must first agree on a definition of information. I will here use that described by Claude Shannon and known as ‘Shannon information’ (Shannon 1948); which is essentially a measure of correlation between the degrees of freedom of a sender and receiver of a message, measured in bits. Neuronal firing rates thereby encode information about the outside world because some of its degrees of freedom are correlated with degrees of freedom of the outside world. I note that, in some theories of consciousness, causation is required in addition to correlation (Landauer 1991; Tononi et al. 1998).

Next, we must agree on how to distinguish conscious from non-conscious mental activity. I will follow the approach pioneered by Dehaene and colleagues who insisted that ‘subjective reports are the key phenomena that a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness purport to study’ (Dehaene and Naccache 2001). So, bringing these two definitions together, then conscious neuronal information (the sender) is that information encoded in the brain that correlates with the information encoded in the subjective reports (the receiver) of a conscious observer.

However, a great deal of information, as degrees of freedom in the brain, may be correlated with subjectively reported information, including the motion of ions through neuronal membrane, the motion of neurotransmitters within the synaptic cleft, the opening and closing of ion channels, blood flow or electromagnetic (EM) field perturbations generated by the motion of electrically charged particles. Each of these neuronal microstates knows, in the Shannon sense of its state being correlated with, some aspect(s) of the visual scene or subjective reports of that scene. Which is a likely physical substrate for the integrated information that must be encoded by conscious minds?

Before answering this question, it is first necessary to define what we mean by integrated information. This might appear to be an easy task as the term is widely used, so much so that there is evidenced by the United Nations Expert Group on the Integration of Statistical and Geospatial Information (http://ggim.un.org/UNGGIM-expert-group/), the International Society of Information Fusion (http://isif.org/), Information Integration Theory (Anderson 2014), data integration systems (Genesereth et al. 1997), numerous statistical and data mining methods that seek to integrate information from multiple sources (Maimon and Rokach 2005), as well as the integrated circuits of computers. However, as the physicist, Rolf Landauer, famously insisted, ‘information is physical’ (Landauer 1991) so integrated information, if it exists at all, must be encoded by a physically integrated substrate. Moreover, if it is to have an output then it needs to be causally competent (Pawłowski et al. 2009): the integrated information must, as an integrated unit, change something physical. Yet, none of the above examples of integrated information are physically integrated. Their information is causally integrated in time, rather than physically integrated in space, as I will now illustrate with a familiar problem from philosophy.

Ryle (2009) insisted that it is a category error to suppose that structures, such as the University of Oxford, have material existence. To make his point, he imagined a visitor to Oxford who visits the library and colleges but then asks ‘But where is the University?’ The visitor’s error is to assume that the university is a member of the category of material objects, rather than an institution which exists causally only in the minds of the students, staff and visitors to the university. Ryle calls this kind of mistake a ‘category error’. An analogous argument can be made for integrated information. University institutions, such as registry, finance, the libraries, exam boards, colleges or executives, integrate and process vast amounts of varied information ranging from student entry criteria, applicant qualifications, book catalogues, exam performance, timetables or salaries. However, this integration, like the institution itself, is causal, rather than physical, in the sense that downstream effects, such as the posting of offers of university places, depend on a multiplicity of upstream informational causes, such as the arrival of application forms and their scrutiny by academics and administrators. The integration is via a causal chain of operations in time, rather than physical integration in space.

This form of temporal integrated information is also a universal feature of computation, such as those performed by Boolean logic gates and instantiated in Turing machines, such as modern computers. For example, the single bit output of an AND logic gate integrates the two bits of information encoded in its two inputs to output a single bit that represents an integration of the gate’s inputs. In reality, the integration is causal in the sense that the state of the output bit at time t2 is dependent on both input bits at time t1. Of course, the single output bit cannot encode both input bits: it is not physically integrated information. Note also that, once a signal has been transmitted from input to output via, for example, a current or voltage change, then the inputs are free to accept new data. So, by the time the signal has reached the output (t2), its state may no longer be correlated with the inputs. There is therefore no physical state that corresponds to the integration of information performed by the gate. This does not, of course, prevent the gate from participating in any complex algorithmic operation that can be considered to integrate information in the sense of the conventional temporal use of the term. Consider, for example, a computer connected to a camera and running an image recognition program whose job is to identify photographs of the actress Jennifer Anniston amongst hundreds of electronic images presented to the camera. By the time the complex series of computations that analyse and integrate features such as hair colour, eye colour, shape of nose, chin, complexion, orientation of the image, etc., have reached a gate that finally commits the program to deliver an audio output of ‘this is Jennifer Aniston’, the input logic gates may have gone on to the next photograph. There can therefore be no physical state that corresponds to the integrated information at any single point in time. The integration exists as a correlation in time, not as a physical integration in space.


Do neurons integrate information?

It is important to stress that no EM field theory of consciousness denies that much or most brain information processing proceeds via conventional neuron/synapse transmission. However, the same argument described above for integrated circuits, applies to the processing of complex information along complex neuronal pathways. They, like logic gates, input sensory information, such as photographs, and process that information along chains of neuronal networks until they reach a group of neurons, or even a single neuron that fires to generate a verbal output of ‘this is Jennifer Aniston’. Nevertheless, just as for logic gates, once a neuron has done its job of processing its many inputs to generate the single output of a firing rate, it is free to accept new data. Downstream neurons involved in the triggering motor output need not be correlated with the simultaneous state of input neurons or neurons involved in the processing of that sensory information by the time the output signal is generated. A hypothetical neuron that prompts the final output of a verbal report is also no more physically linked to its sensory inputs such, as in the retina or ear, than it is to a subject’s digestive system or skull. And even neurons that respond to highly processed and integrated information, such as the famous Jennifer Aniston neuron (Quiroga et al. 2005), only encode a single firing rate that cannot represent anything more than a tiny fraction of the information present in conscious percept. Its firing rate is, of course, all that any single neuron can know. Neurons integrate information but, as for logic gates, the integration is temporal, not physical, as the information to be integrated is separated in both space and time. Also, the so-called integrated information is far more complex than a single neuron’s coding capacity. This kind of temporal integration cannot correspond to ‘our capacity to integrate information across time, space, attributes and ideas’ (Treisman 1999).

Of course, a huge number of firing neurons may fire in response to Jennifer Aniston’s face or some other potentially integrated conscious percept. It may be that each of these firing neurons encodes different aspects of the conscious percept—perhaps the particular colour of the actress’ eyes, the shape of her nose or the texture of her hair. One could imagine a network of such neurons that, together, encode and ‘integrate’ the conscious percept. But how do the firing neurons integrate their information? From the perspective of functionality, they need not even be physically connected so long as they, collectively, deliver their signals to a motor neuron(s) that execute(s) the verbal report ‘that is Jennifer Anniston’s face’. In reality, they need be no more physically connected to each other than are the different colleges of the University of Oxford. All that is required is a causal chain.

Nevertheless, nerves are, of course, physical connected, but, in the example, those encoding Jennifer Anniston’s face are no more physically connected to each other than they are to any other neurons or even cells of the body, particularly as matter-based signals, such as hormones, neurotransmitters or action potentials, do not attenuate with distance. If physical connectedness was sufficient for consciousness, then we would be aware of all of the information encoded in our entire body at all times. Neural networks, on their own, cannot be responsible for physically integrating conscious information because, like integrated circuits, they integrate information only temporally, not physically.


Integrating information in space, rather than in time

There are, however, physical systems that encode information integrated over space in a single moment of time. We know this form of information as force fields. The most obvious is the gravitational field that, at any point on the Earth’s surface, provides a force that effectively integrates the magnitude and distribution of local masses such as those of the Earth, Moon and Sun. Similarly, the EM field at any point in space represents an integration of information concerning the type, distribution and motion of local charges. In contrast to the temporal integration described above, force fields physically integrate complex information that may be simultaneously downloaded from any point in the field. This is apparent to anyone who views a TV show that has been transmitted from a single transmitter to their smartphone, alongside a thousand other people who may simultaneously view the same program on their phones in a thousand different locations. Moreover, an EM field can, like an integrated circuit, compute.

Consider for example, the arrangement of iron filings sprinkled over a magnet. A conventional computer could calculate their configuration by inputting the initial random configurations of the filings into an algorithm that implements either Maxwell’s equations or the equations of quantum electrodynamics to output their final equilibrium configuration. Yet the EM field at each point in space, generated by the electron spin of iron atoms within the magnet, instantly computes this solution. In this sense, the field represents an algorithm in space, rather than the algorithms in time that are implemented by Turing machines. And, most importantly, the information involved in the computation is simultaneously available in the space of the magnet and its surroundings. It is spatially, rather than temporarily, integrated information. The EM field’s information is complex information that is physically bound.

Magnets can also encode visual information. The artist, Andrzej Lenard, paints magnetic pictures, such as the portrait of Robert Downey Jr (from https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=PHzz81yapcc). Note that the magnetic field-encoded information would be present whether the iron filings were there or not. The coding of the image would exist in space as invisible integrated information. This kind of coding is, I argue, much closer to the physical reality of our thoughts, than a firing neuron. However, it is static, rather than dynamic, and, unlike the signal from a WIFI router, the visual information is locally discrete rather than distributed throughout the space of the image.

illustrates how dynamic EM field information can integrate information and function as a logic gate. The figure illustrates an EM field AND gate with two inputs and a single output, each encoding either a zero or one. The inputs are dipoles that act as EMF transmitters that oscillate between two states. For ease of presentation, illustrates the different inputs represented as firing (oscillating corresponding to input = 1) or non-firing (not oscillating, input = 0) states. The output is then an EMF receiver that implements the AND rule to output a signal. Note that the receiving node can be located anywhere in the space of the field. So, and most importantly, the entire AND computation is distributed throughout the space of the overlapping field of the inputs. The computation and integration of input information is implemented in space, rather than time. It is physically integrated information processing.

Combinations of EMF transmitters and receivers that implement different logical functions could, in principle, implement any complex algorithm, for example, an algorithm that recognizes images of Jennifer Aniston. In contrast to the above static magnetic image of Robert Downey Jr, this EM field algorithm would be distributed throughout the space of the field; such that, like a WIFI signal, it could be downloaded from any point in the space of the field. In this sense, the field possesses features in common with holograms that similarly store distributed information. But in the case of the cemi field, the information exists as an algorithm in space, rather than time. It is physically integrated information. Field-implemented algorithms such as these, but in the brain, are, I argue, the physical substrate of conscious thoughts.

It is, however, important to recognize that, although EM fields are maximally connected—the universe has a single EM field EM – waves travel at the speed of light across huge distances. However, their strength is subject to an inverse square (electric component) or cube (magnetic component) law so that the EM field perturbation of a single neuron rapidly falls off with distance. In my earlier paper, I estimated that the EM field electrical perturbation from the firing of a single neuron extends into a volume of only about 80 µm encompassing a maximum of about 200 neurons (McFadden 2002a). So, in contrast to matter-based signals that do not attenuate with distance, signals passing through the cemi field will tend to act only locally, unless boosted by chains of synchronization (see below).

Note however, and very importantly, that, in contrast to temporally integrated information, an algorithm in space can function only when its computational nodes fire synchronously so that their inputs are simultaneously available to all the components of the network. Therefore, a key prediction of the proposal that consciousness is distributed EM field-based algorithms is that conscious information will be correlated with synchronously firing neurons.


EMF transmitters and receivers in the brain

It has been known since the 19th century that the brain generates its own EM field, which can be detected by electrodes inserted to the brain. Its source is electrical dipoles within the neuronal membranes caused by the motion of ions in and out of those membranes during action potentials and synaptic potentials. The periodic discharge of neurons—firing or action potentials—generates EMF waves that propagate out of the neuron and into the surrounding inter-neuronal spaces where they overlap and combine to generate the brain’s global EM field that is routinely measured by brain scanning techniques such as electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG). The human brain therefore possesses around 100 billion EMF transmitters.

The human brain also possesses at least 100 billion EMF receivers as each neuron in bounded by a membrane embedded with thousands of voltage-gated ion channels whose firing is triggered by EM field fluctuation across the membrane. Although these channels are generally assumed to respond only to large fluctuations of tens of millivolts across the membrane, much larger than the global EM field strength, EM field potential changes of less than 1 mV across the neuronal membrane are nevertheless capable of modulating neuronal firing (Schmitt et al. 1976). Moreover, for neurons poised close to the critical firing potential, the opening of just a single ion channel may be sufficient to trigger firing (Arhem and Johansson 1996). This degree of sensitivity suggests that very tiny changes in membrane potential, of similar strength to spontaneous fluctuations in the brain’s endogenous EM field, may influence the firing of neurons that are already close to firing.


The cemi field theory of consciousness

The conscious electromagnetic information (cemi) field theory claims that the brain’s EM field is the physical substrate of consciousness. It was first outlined in a book published in 2000 in which I proposed that the brain’s ‘EM field … integrate[s] information from all of the calculations … performed by … [its] logic gates (McFadden 2000). The theory was further developed in two papers published in 2002 (McFadden 2002a,b). Similar theories were proposed around the same time by neurobiologist Pockett (2000), the neurophysiologist John (2001) and the neurophysiologists Fingelkurts and Fingelkurts (2008) and Fingelkurts et al. (2001). In 2013, I provided an update on the cemi field theory incorporating more recent experimental evidence (McFadden 2013a) as well as arguing that the theory accounts for the gestalt properties of meaning, in an accompanying paper (McFadden 2013b). In 2014, Adam Barrett similarly argued that the brain’s EM field integrates neuronal information to provide the substrate of consciousness (Barrett 2014).

The idea that the seat of consciousness is simply the brain’s EM field may initially sound outlandish but is no more extraordinary than the claim that the seat of consciousness is the matter of the brain. All it involves is going from the right to the left hand side of Einstein’s famous equation, E = mc2 thereby replacing the notion that consciousness is encoded by matter of the brain, with that of proposing that it is encoded by the energy of the EM fields generated by the motions of its charged matter. (Note that, by illustrating this idea with Einstein’s equation, I am not, of course, proposing any interconversion of matter and energy in the brain.) Matter and energy are equally physical; but, instead of being composed of material, the cemi field theory proposes that our thoughts are composed of the brains EM field energy. This is a kind of dualism, but it is scientific dualism based on the physical difference between matter and energy, rather than a metaphysical distinction between matter and spirit.

Although, as I have argued, shifting from matter to energy of the brain is conceptually trivial, when searching for an appropriate substrate in the brain that can physically integrated complex information, the move draws an immediate payoff, as it effortlessly solves the binding problem. Whereas information encoded in the matter of neurons is, as I have argued, always localized and discrete both in space and time, information in the field, as illustrated in, is always integrated yet distributed, in the sense that it may be downloaded from any point within the field. Since, in this case, ‘the field’ is the brain’s global EM field, it also provides a feasible physical substrate for the notions of working memory and/or the global workspace that have been proposed in many other theories of conscious (Baars 2005). And, as illustrated in EM fields may also implement algorithms. This capacity, known as ‘field computing’ (MacLennan 1999) sometimes as quantum-like computing (Khrennikov 2011), has several features in common with quantum computing such as ease of implementation of mathematical functions such as Fourier transforms, compared to digital computers. Moreover, as illustrated in, this form of field computing—algorithms in space rather than in time—could only be implemented by neurons (either EMF transmitters or receivers) that fire synchronously. So, the theory predicts that, if consciousness is implementing field computing, then consciousness should be highly correlated with the synchrony of neural firing rather than firing rates.

Several decades ago, work conducted by Wolf Singer and colleagues demonstrated that neurons in the monkey brain fire synchronously when the animal attends to the stimulus (Kreiter and Singer 1996). Many additional studies confirmed and extended these findings to many different experimental systems. For example, work in David Leopold’s laboratory at Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, in Tubingen, Germany (Wilke et al. 2006) investigated awake monkeys trained to respond to a visual stimulus—the removal of a red dot from a target area—by pulling a lever (to receive their fruit juice reward). The researchers monitored both neuron spiking and changes in local EM field potentials in V1, V2 and V4 regions of the monkey’s visual cortex. They demonstrated that spiking of neurons in cortical areas V1 and V2 was totally uncorrelated with the monkey’s perception of the target; however, low frequency (alpha range, particularly 9–30 Hz) modulation of local field potentials—presumed to be generated by synchronously firing neurons—in these same regions did correlate with perception. It seems that though neuron firing rate in the primary visual cortex does not see the stimulus, synchronicity of neuron firing does indeed see the target.

Many subsequent studies have also demonstrated that neural synchrony also correlates with conscious perception in humans. For example, neural synchrony patterns were found to correlate with conscious recognition by subjects exposed to optical illusions (Lutz et al. 2002). More recent work has demonstrated that conscious auditory perception is correlated with long-range synchrony of gamma oscillations (Steinmann et al. 2014). Synchronization between the anterior and posterior cortex has been shown to correlate with consciousness levels of patients who have suffered traumatic brain injury (Leon-Carrion et al. 2012).

Of course, there may be several different and often contradictory signals being simultaneously projected into the cemi field by networks or clusters of synchronizing neurons. Even so, what is distinctive about the cemi field in contrast to many other theories of consciousness is that, because EM fields are always unified, there is only ever one EM field in the brain. The dominant information in consciousness will then be the one that is associated with the strongest EM field perturbation capable of modulating neural firing within that singular field. This has been demonstrated in numerous studies, for example this 2005 study (Doesburg et al. 2005) demonstrated that increased gamma-band synchrony predicts switching of conscious perceptual objects in classic binocular rivalry. Similar switches in EEG or MEG patterns have been shown to predict conscious percepts in numerous studies (Sterzer et al. 2009) opening the possibility of ‘mind-reading’ by decoding brain EM field signals. In nearly all of these studies, the conscious percept corresponds to the dominant EM field signal suggesting that competition between rival percepts is resolved through positive feeding back loops within re-entrant circuits leading to what Dehaene calls a ‘global ignition’ or ‘avalanche’ of the dominant signal (Dehaene 2014). Therefore, in contrast to other theories of consciousness, such as global workspace or Integrated Information Theory (IIT), that use arbitrary or ill-defined thresholds for access to consciousness, the cemi field relies on a measurable physical parameter—the strength of EM field perturbations that are capable of modulating neural firing—to differentiate between conscious and non-conscious brain information.

From a neuronal perspective there appears to be no obvious reason why synchrony should make a difference to neural processing: neurons deliver the same information and perform the same informational processing, whether or not they are firing synchronously. Of course, many theories of consciousness do incorporate neural synchrony by, for example, viewing it as a signature of the re-entrant neural connectivity characteristic of globally distributed neuronal circuits that are proposed to underpin consciousness (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Seth et al. 2004), or a consequence of coincidence detection within neurons involved in conscious thoughts. Yet neurons need not fire synchronously to distribute information globally and re-entrant circuits need not, necessarily, fire synchronously. Similarly, there seems to be no obvious reason why conscious neural processing requires coincidence detection any more than non-conscious neural processing as they both perform temporal information integration. So, synchrony, per se, is neither a necessary nor sufficient requirement for consciousness in matter-based neuronal models of consciousness. As far as I am aware, it is only in the EM field theories that synchrony plays an obligatory role in consciousness information processing.

Note however that the EM field theories of consciousness are entirely compatible with the observation that highly synchronized brain activity, such as is typical for epileptic seizures, disrupt consciousness. Conscious brain states necessarily encode complex information that correlates with features of the outside world. Widespread neuronal synchrony—such as experienced during an epileptic seizure—is empty of informational content that correlates with the outside world and is thereby only consistent with a non-conscious state.


‘Free will’ as the output node of the cemi field

The cemi field theory differs from some other field theories of consciousness (Pockett 2000) in that it proposes that consciousness—as the brain’s EM field—has outputs as well as inputs. In the theory, the brain’s endogenous EM field influences brain activity in a feedback loop (note that, despite its ‘free’ adjective, the cemi field’s proposed influence is entirely causal (McFadden 2002a)) acting on voltage-gated ion channels in neuronal membranes to trigger neural firing. This assertion is supported by abundant theoretical work and experimental data. Experimental evidence for the brain’s endogenous EM field influencing neural firing was scanty when I first described the theory in 2000 (McFadden 2000) and 2002 (McFadden 2002a,b), but included evidence that transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which generate EM fields in the brain of similar magnitude to the brain’s endogenous EM fields can influence behaviour (Beckers and Hömberg 1992; Amassian et al. 1998; Hallett 2000; McFadden 2002a). In 2013 (McFadden 2013a), I summarized more recent experimental evidence obtained from several labs demonstrating that artificially generated external EM fields, of similar strength to those of endogenous brain EM fields, do indeed change firing patterns in whole animals, brain tissue slices and neuronal cells (Fujisawa et al. 2004; Frohlich and McCormick 2010; Anastassiou et al. 2011). Since then, a wealth of additional experimental evidence has accumulated which clearly demonstrates that the brain’s endogenous EM fields do indeed play a role in communicating between brain neurons (Qiu et al. 2015; Anastassiou and Koch 2015; Han et al. 2018); prompting some researchers to propose ‘that our visual experience may at least some times be coming through in waves.’ (Mathewson et al. 2011).

In summary, there is now, at the very least, abundant evidence that, as well as standard synaptic transmission, brain neurons also communicate through endogenous EM fields. It is a small step from this realization to the cemi field theory, which proposes that the action of the brain’s (conscious) endogenous EM field on neural firing rates is experienced as conscious thoughts that influence our actions. Curiously, the kind of influence proposed for the brain’s EM field in the cemi field theory is very similar to the role proposed for consciousness by William James more than a century ago. James proposed that the cortex is delicately balanced with a ‘hair-trigger’ such that the slightest jar or accident could set it firing erratically, yet ‘if consciousness can load the dice, can exert a constant pressure in the right direction, can feel what nerve processes are leading to the goal, can reinforce and strengthen these and at the same time inhibit those that threaten to lead astray, why, consciousness will be of invaluable service.’ (James 1988, p. 26).

I now discuss how the cemi field theory solves most of the puzzling features of consciousness.


The difference between conscious and non-conscious brain states

One of the most profoundly puzzling features of the brain is that it operates simultaneously in both conscious and non-conscious streams, at least in man. Most theories of consciousness attempt to account for this difference in terms of some arbitrary critical threshold in the degree of complexity (Seth et al. 2006), integration (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Tononi et al. 1998; Srinivasan et al. 1999), selection (Edelman and Tononi 2008), long distance integration (Dehaene et al. 2014) or access to some kind of hypothetical global workspace (Baars 1988; Dehaene et al. 1998), that is necessary for conscious awareness. Yet these theories have difficulty accounting for why some highly complex and integrated neuronal activities, such as those involved in decoding grammatical rules within a sentence, are performed without awareness; whereas others that should be much simpler, such as those involved in long multiplication, can only be performed consciously.

In contrast to the threshold models above, once it is accepted that EM fields influence neural firing patterns (as evidenced in TMS and external EM field studies, described above) then the evolutionary emergence of both conscious and non-conscious mental streams becomes inevitable. This follows because the impact of the brain’s endogenous EM field on neuronal computations is likely to be both positive and negative. Positive influences could result from phase-locking of multiple downstream EM field-sensitive neurons to the same stimulus; or rapid distribution of EM-field-encoded information to many regions of the brain (as in the global workspace model). Also, as argued above, ‘field computing’ may provide computation capabilities that are hard to emulate in the neuronal brain. Negative influences of EM fields would include all the varieties of undesirable ‘feedback’ familiar to both sound and electrical engineers. Having both positive and negative influences on brain function, then the brain’s EM field would have become visible to natural selection. Mutations in genes that enhanced sensitivity, perhaps by increasing synchronous firing, in neuronal circuits in which EM fields enhance fitness would have been positively selected; as would genes that decrease EM field sensitivity in neuronal circuits in which EM fields decreased fitness. The brain would then have inevitably evolved into an EM field-sensitive and conscious stream associated with synchronous neural firing; together with and an EM field-insensitive but non-conscious stream associated with asynchronously firing neurons. This is of course precisely what we find in the human mind. Indeed, once it is accepted that EM fields influence fitness both positively and negatively through their impact on neural firing rates—as seems evident from the evidence outlined above—the theory of natural selection predicts that brains will evolve in precisely this way.

The cemi field theory also naturally accounts for the fact that the non-conscious mind appears to operate as a parallel processor that can perform several tasks simultaneously, such as whistling a tune whilst riding a bicycle; whereas the conscious mind appears to operate as a serial computer incapable of, for example, reading whilst simultaneously engaging in a conversation. That the non-conscious mind can operate in parallel is not problematic. With 100 billion neurons at its disposal, it is easy to see how the brain can partition operations amongst them. The puzzle is to understand why conscious tasks always interfere with one another. As far as I am aware, this is not accounted for by any matter-based neuronal theory of consciousness but is easily accounted for in the cemi field theory as the brain’s conscious EM field, as already pointed out, is always singular. Just as tossing two stones into the same still pond will generate waves that interfere with each other; so two thoughts emerging within a brain’s global EM field will always interfere with one another. So, within the cemi field theory, the brain naturally divides into a non-conscious neuronal parallel processor capable of implementing lots of independent tasks without interference; and a conscious EM field-based serial processor that can only do one thing at a time.

I should also point out that, in contrast to other theories of consciousness, such as IIT, although information integration is central to the cemi field theory, the theory does not predict that, as understood in its usual temporal or computational sense, information integration is either exclusive to, or maximal in, consciousness. In fact, it is perfectly possible that the simplest thoughts may sometimes dominate consciousness, consistent with the finding that meditative states are often associated with slower and more rhythmic patterns in EEG (Banquet 1973) and MEG (Dor-Ziderman et al. 2013). Conversely, the theory is also consistent with the finding that tasks that require a considerable degree of information integration, such as recognizing words, or whether one number is greater or less than another, may be performed without awareness; whereas more complex operations, such as multiplication or natural language understanding appear to require consciousness (Dehaene et al. 2006). The lack of correlation between complexity of information integration and conscious thought is also apparent in the commonplace observation that tasks that must surely require a massive degree of information integration, such as the locomotory actions needed to run across a rugged terrain, may be performed without awareness but simple sensory inputs, such as stubbing your toe, will over-ride your conscious thoughts. The cemi field theory proposes that the non-conscious neural processing involves temporal (computational) integration whereas operations, such as natural language comprehension, require the simultaneous spatial integration provided by the cemi field. The theory is also consistent with the finding that non-conscious neural processing may be more robust to disruption by external EM fields than conscious processing as is evidenced by, for example, the finding that TMS to V1 induces blindsight (Dehaene et al. 2006).


Signatures of consciousness

Dehaene (2014) has recently described four key signatures of consciousness: (i) a sudden ignition of parietal and prefrontal circuits; (ii) a slow P3 wave in EEG; (iii) a late and sudden burst of high-frequency oscillations; and (iv) exchange of bidirectional and synchronized messages over long distances in the cortex.

It is notable that the only feature common to each of these signatures—aspects of what Dehaene calls a ‘global ignition’ or ‘avalanche’—is large endogenous EM field perturbations in the brain, entirely consistent with the cemi field theory. It is also interesting to consider how EM fields may play a causal role in generating these signatures. Firstly, as has been recognized in many studies, conscious neuronal processing tends to be associated with re-entrant circuits, essentially closed loops of neuronal activity whereby neuronal outputs are fed back into input neurons. The function of these re-entrant circuits remains controversial, but they could be analogous to amplifier circuits in electronics that boost and phase-lock oscillations by feeding outputs back into inputs. However, in standard electronics, amplifier circuits respond linearly; whereas, as Dehaene and others have shown, consciousness demonstrates a non-linear all-or-nothing response in which increasing signal strength leads to a sudden transition from non-conscious to conscious perception. This is precisely the kind of behaviour—more like a phase transition—that would be expected for EM field-sensitive neuronal circuits that are acting as both transmitters and receivers of EM field information. If only a few neurons are firing synchronously then the EM fields generated by their firing will be too weak to influence firing. However, as more neurons are recruited into the re-entrant synchronously firing amplifier circuits then a threshold will be reached when the output EM field will be sufficiently strong to stimulate firing of multiple receiver neurons and thereby recruit more neurons into the amplifier network in a positive feedback loop. This EM field loop will rapidly amplify and expand the network of synchronous oscillations to create the kind of global ignition or neuronal avalanche that, by Dehaene and others, have described as a key signature of consciousness.


The role of consciousness in learning and memory

It is well established that conscious awareness or attention appears to be a prerequisite to laying down long-term memories and for learning complex tasks (Baars and Gage 2010), but the mechanism remains obscure. Most theories account for this fact by simply incorporating a requirement for consciousness in laying down memories, without any physical justification for that rule. However, in the cemi field theory, a role for consciousness in memory and learning emerges as a natural consequence of the theory. For example, when learning a new motor skill, such as playing the piano, the small conscious pushes and pulls towards or away from neural firing (as anticipated by William James) provided by the brain’s endogenous EM field may be essential for delivering the fine motor control needed to hit the right notes at the right times. However, if the target neurones for EM augmentation are connected by Hebbian synapses then the influence of the brain’s EM field will tend to either increase [long-term potentiation (LTP)] or decreased [long-term depression (LTD)] neural connectivity: networks that deliver the skill will become hard-wired. After repeated augmentation by the brain’s EM field, conscious motor actions will become increasingly independent of EM field influences. The motor activity will be ‘learned’ in the sense that it will thereafter be capable of being performed without (conscious) EM field input. Indeed, because the networks will then be hard-wired into their optimal configuration, conscious EM field inputs will then tend to perturb the learned skill, exactly as we experience.

With only the recognition that EM fields influence neuron firing and the rule ‘neurons that fire together wire together’, a role for consciousness in memory thereby becomes inevitable. This proposed mechanism makes a clear prediction, that external EM fields will tend to interfere—positively or negatively—with memory and learning; which has been demonstrated in many TMS studies (Gagnon et al. 2011; Morgan et al. 2013).


Objections to EM field theories of consciousness

I dealt with many of the most obvious objections to the cemi field theory in my earlier papers (McFadden 2002a,b), and Susan Pockett has reviewed most within an informative curated scholarpaedia page dedicated to EM field theories of consciousness (http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Field_theories_of_consciousness). For example, it is often claimed that external EM fields incorrectly predict that external EM fields perturb our thoughts. As Pockett points out, this is easily refuted by the routine observation that they do not significantly influence EEG signals from the brain, presumably because their frequencies and strength do not couple with brain waves. The, by now, well-established neurophysiological (Pell et al. 2011) and cognitive (Guse et al. 2010; Rounis et al. 2010) effects of TMS do however provide strong evidence that, appropriately structured, external EM fields do indeed influence our thoughts. Nevertheless, whereas both evolution and development have, according to the cemi field theory, tuned the brain to both encode and decode EM field-based information to form coherent ideas, external EM fields from, say, TMS or MRI scanners, will, from the perspective of the brain, be incoherent signals, perhaps capable of disrupting, but not forming coherent thoughts.

Another common objection to EM field theories of consciousness is that ‘split brain’ patients with severed corpus callosum appear to possess two separated consciousnesses, despite, presumably, retaining a single intact brain EM field. However, although EM waves can indeed travel huge distance, their strength is subject to an inverse or cube law so that, as outlined above, EM field perturbations rapidly fall off with distance. For consciousness to be global, conscious information in EM fields thereby must to be amplified and transmitted by relays of in recurrent oscillations of synchronously firing neurons. It is these recurrent neuronal networks that are severed by the cutting of the corpus callosum in split brain patients, thereby preventing conscious EM field information in the right hemisphere from reaching speech centres in the left hemisphere and vice versa. Without the unification provided by networks of synchronously firing neurons, EM field information in each hemisphere will remain locked in each hemisphere.

Finally, there is the question why only some EM fields—those found inside brains—are conscious; whereas other EM fields, such as those generated by a toaster, are presumed to be non-conscious. Yet, just as people and toasters are made of matter but not all matter is alive, similarly, though consciousness may be made of EM fields, not all EM fields are conscious. Only a subset of systems made out of matter is alive; similarly only a subset of EM fields are likely to be conscious. The minimal characteristic of an EM field to qualify as conscious must surely be that it possesses sufficient complexity to encode complex computations together with causal power capable of transferring thoughts to another conscious being. Neither of these conditions is satisfied by the EM fields of a toaster or any other EM field, other than those inside brains. The cemi field theory thereby does not predict panpsychism for such objects.


Testing the cemi field theory

Many of the predictions of the cemi field theory, such as that appropriately structured external EM fields will influence neural firing patterns and thoughts, have already been confirmed, as described above. The recent development of brain–computer interfaces (Mashat et al. 2017; Lazarou et al. 2018; Nuyujukian et al. 2018) that measure EEG signals and analyse those signals to generate limb motor outputs via TMS, effectively operates the same informational loop from neuron to neuron via the brain’s EM fields, as is proposed in the cemi field theory. Patients trained to use these devices experience EM field mediated motor control as their conscious actions. The cemi field theory merely proposes that the same information loop exists in all of us: we call it free will.

However, the cemi field theory also makes predictions that have yet to be tested, such as the possibility of inhibiting specific responses through specific external EM field perturbations. For example, it is well established that stimulus-provoked decision-making is accompanied by characteristic event related potentials (ERPs), such as the P300 (P3) wave that is associated with higher-level processing of incoming sensory information. The cemi field theory predicts that appropriately shaped artificial radio frequency or microwave EM fields that penetrate brain tissue should either reinforce of inhibit the motor response normally associated with the ERPs in a frequency and phase-dependent manner.

The cemi theory also has potentially transformative implications for the engineering of artificial consciousness. It accounts for why conventional computers, despite their undoubted computational skills, have not exhibited the slightest spark of consciousness, nor any signs of the general intelligence endowed by conscious minds. Many AI enthusiasts argue that artificial consciousness will emerge when computers eventually overtake the computational speed of the brain. The cemi theory predicts instead that no computer that computes solely through matter will ever be conscious, irrespective of its complexity, architecture or computational speed. The human brain is estimated to operate at about 1 exaFLOP capable of performing a billion billion calculations per second, about 20 times faster than the world’s fastest (in 2019) computer, the US Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory’s Summit, or OLCF-4 supercomputer. With computer speed continuing to follow Moore’s law, this prediction of the cemi field theory is likely to be tested within a decade or so.

However, although the cemi field theory insists that conventional computers will never be conscious, it does provide a route towards artificial consciousness through designing an EM field-sensitive computer. In fact, one may already have been constructed, albeit accidently. I previously described (McFadden 2002a) experiments performed by the School of Cognitive & Computing Sciences (COGS) group at the University of Sussex (Thompson et al. 1996; Davidson), that group appears to have evolved an electronic circuit that computes through EM field interactions. The team used a silicon chip known as a field-programmable gate array (FPGA), comprised of an array of cells and software-configurable switches. Starting from a population of random configurations, the team selected for those better able to solve the toy task of distinguishing between two musical tones. After 5000 generations of this artificial selection, they succeeded in evolving a chip that could efficiently perform this task. However, when they examined its circuit diagram they discovered that some of its components which, if removed, impaired function, yet were not connected by wires to either inputs or outputs. Also, the performance of the chip was erratic and tended to work best at night. The solution to both these puzzles came from their realization that they had evolved the chip during experiments performed mostly at night when the researchers tended to listen to the radio. They concluded that their evolutionary process had not only optimized the wired connection of the chip, but also harnessed EMF coupling between the FPGA chip and the radio: they had evolved an algorithm in space, rather than time. I previously proposed (McFadden 2002a) that an analogous, though natural process, led to the evolution of consciousness in the human lineage. As far as I know, the approach of the COGS group has not been explored further; but, if the cemi field theory is correct, it provides a possible route towards building an artificial conscious mind.


The physics of consciousness

Further insights into why we need EM fields to encode integrated conscious information can be gained directly from consideration of the physics of matter and energy. Matter is particulate whereas EM energy, such as light, is composed of waves. Nevertheless, the foundational experiments of quantum mechanics demonstrated that particles have wave-like properties and waves have associated particle properties. The information encoded in a particle is then also encoded in the wave associated with the particle. Physically unified integrated information could then potentially be encoded in matter, if their associated matter waves overlap. The wave-like properties of matter particles are however limited by their de Broglie wavelength, which is inversely proportional to their momentum (product of mass × velocity). So, an electron with rest mass energy of 0.511 MeV and kinetic energy of 1 eV will have an associated de Broglie wavelength of 1.23 nm. This is larger than the typical size of atoms, so electrons are delocalized in atomic orbitals of molecules such as benzene whose three pi electrons are delocalized across all six carbon atoms in the molecule. The electronic information encoded in the matter of electrons is thereby physically unified within molecules. However, the proton is about 1800 times more massive than an electron so its de Broglie wavelength and thereby its wave-like properties, when travelling at the same speed as the electron, is 1800 times smaller. The matter of protons is thereby localized entirely within the nucleus of each atom of a molecule such as benzene. Imagine writing either a 1 or 0 on each of three protons, or each of three pi electrons, in a single benzene molecule. To examine the three proton bits, it would be necessary to interrogate all three atoms within the molecule because each bit is locked within the de Broglie wavelength of each particle: their information is discrete and localized, not integrated. Yet all three electrons bits could be recovered by examining the pi electron configuration at any of the six atoms within the benzene ring: their information is delocalized and thereby integrated and unified across each of the atoms within the molecule. Essentially, each pi electron behaves like a wave within each benzene molecule: the information of all three electrons is bound within the molecule. Yet, this electron particle information molecule would not be available from an adjacent benzene molecule in, say, a crystal of benzene; unless the crystal is cooled to close to absolute zero so that the kinetic energy and thereby momentum of each particle is drastically reduced thereby lengthening its de Broglie wavelength and its wave-like properties, beyond individual molecules.

Since de Broglie wavelength is inversely proportionally to mass, molecules become more and more particle-like as they become more massive and detection of their wave nature, and thereby their ability to encode physically integrated information, becomes correspondingly difficult. Hence, although the wave properties of electrons was demonstrated in 1927, detecting the wave properties of a molecule consisting of up to 2000 atoms with de Broglie wavelengths of around 53 fm, five orders of magnitude smaller than the diameter of the molecule, was achieved only in 2019 in a stunning tour de force of interferometry (Fein et al. 2019).

However, under normal circumstances the information encoded within matter particles is integrated only within atoms and molecules, not between them. This is what we mean by ‘matter’. So, information encoded in the matter particles of neurons, their ions, neurotransmitters or other biomolecules, is always discrete and localized within each molecule. This kind of information, although perfectly functional for temporal information processing, cannot be the substrate of physically integrated, unified and bound conscious information.

However, the situation is very different if, instead of the particles themselves, we consider the EM fields generated by charged particles, such as electrons. The EM field particle, the photon, has zero mass (photons do possess ‘relativistic mass’ but this is irrelevant to this argument.) so has no de Broglie wavelength. Instead, its wave potentially extends to infinity. The EM field of charged particles consist of virtual photons whose waves similarly extend to infinity, though decreasing in intensity according to an inverse square and cube laws. Therefore, information encoded in charged particles of the brain, such as the ions involved in generating action potentials, is integrated, unified and bound within the overlapping EM fields generated by their motion. The brain’s EM field, rather than its matter, is thereby the only feasible physical substrate for conscious integrated information. Consciousness is what physically integrated information feels like, from the frame of the photons encoding that information.


Discussion and Conclusions

Nagel famously asked us to imagine what it is like being a bat and insisted that we never can. The cemi field theory asks us to imagine what it would be like to be an EM field with inputs from oscillating electrons in neuronal membranes and outputs to oscillating electrons in neuronal membranes. Our tendency is to view this from a third person perspective looking down on the EM field and asking what its properties are. However, we must instead imagine moving to the frame of the brain’s EM field. This will be very different, analogous to how an EM field may be experienced as magnetic, from a stationary frame, but electric, from a moving frame, and vice versa. Einstein came up with special relativity through his gedanken experiment of considering what the universe would look like from the frame of a photon. Understanding awareness requires a similar shift to the frame of the EM field of the brain. We can, for example, consider what it would be like to be one photon in the cloud of photons (the cemi field) that travel from emitting to receiving electrons in neuronal membranes of the brain. From their frame, since they are massless particles that travel at the speed of light, they experience neither space nor time between emission and reception. Between these points, they may carry, say, up to 10 bits of information encoded in the photon’s energy, spin and direction (Tentrup et al. 2017). However, between emission and absorption, photons are more properly considered as delocalized waves that obey Maxwell’s laws. The cemi field is then the superposition of trillions of photon waves whose information is encoded in their ensuing pattern of constructive and destructive interference. That information is present at all points in the field, in the sense that the information encoded in a single photon emitted by an oscillating electron, say in the hypothalamus, can materialize—be absorbed by—any charged particle in its light cone, though with probability subject to the inverse square law and attenuation due to absorption events between emitter and receiver.

Nevertheless, within the brain, the light cones of all the trillions of emitted photon will almost entirely overlap. Any charged particle in the brain (or outside, but with rapidly diminishing probability) can potentially be the receiver of any of the trillions of emitted 10 bit packages of information available in the entire field. So, each point in the field represents the integrations of trillions of bits of physically encoded information instantaneously present at each point in the field. I previously proposed that ‘Nearly all qualia—the sound of C minor, the meaning of the number seven, the image of a triangle, the concept of a motor car, the feeling of anger, etc.—are similarly complex … conscious states [that] integrate parallel information streams to form a model that is both complex and physically unified within the cemi field.' That is, the qualia associated with hearing the musical note middle C is what an a EM field perturbation in the brain that correlates with the sensory input of middle C feels like, from the inside. IIT theory has also proposed that qualia are the experience of integrated information (Balduzzi and Tononi 2009); although Barrett argued that IIT cannot capture intrinsic (independent of an observer’s frame of reference) integrated information yet that could be captured by an EM field-based consciousness (Barrett 2014).

In this sense, the cemi theory incorporates Chalmers’ (Chalmers 1995) ‘double-aspect’ principle that information has both a physical, and a phenomenal or experiential aspect. At the particulate level, a molecule of the neurotransmitter glutamate encodes bond energies, angles, etc. but nothing extrinsic to itself. Awareness makes no sense for this kind matter-encoded information: what can glutamate be aware of except itself? Conversely, at the wave level, information encoded in physical fields is physically unified and can encode extrinsic information, as utilized in TV and radio signals. This EM field-based information will, according to the double-aspect principle, be a suitable substrate for experience. As proposed in my earlier paper (McFadden 2002a) ‘awareness will be a property of any system in which information is integrated into an information field that is complex enough to encode representations of real objects in the outside world (such as a face)’. Nevertheless, awareness is meaningless unless it can communicate so only fields that have access to a motor system, such as the cemi field, are candidates for any scientific notion of consciousness.

I previously proposed (McFadden 2013b), that complex information acquires its meaning, in the sense of binding of all of the varied aspects of a mental object, in the brain’s EM field. Here, I extend this idea to propose that meaning is an algorithm experienced, in its entirety from problem to its solution, as a single percept in the global workspace of brain’s EM field. This is where distributed information encoded in millions of physically separated neurons comes together. It is where Shakespeare’s words are turned into his poetry. It is also, where problems and solutions, such as how to untangle a rope from the wheels of a bicycle, are grasped in their entirety.

There are of course many unanswered questions, such as degree and extent of synchrony required to encode conscious thoughts, the influence of drugs or anaesthetics on the cemi field or whether cemi fields are causally active in animal brains. Yet the cemi theory provides a new paradigm in which consciousness is rooted in an entirely physical, measurable and artificially malleable physical structure and is amenable to experimental testing. The cemi field theory thereby delivers a kind of dualism, but it is a scientific dualism built on the distinction between matter and energy, rather than matter and spirit. Consciousness is what algorithms that exist simultaneously in the space of the brain’s EM field, feel like.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


A new experimental phenomenological method to explore the subjective features of psychological phenomena: its application to binocular rivalry

Takuya Niikawa, Katsunori Miyahara, Hiro Taiyo Hamada, Satoshi Nishida — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7532693, CC BY 4.0.

The subjective features of psychological phenomena have been studied intensively in experimental science in recent years. Although various methods have been proposed to identify subjective features of psychological phenomena, there are elusive subjective features such as the spatiotemporal structure of experience, which are difficult to capture without some additional methodological tools. We propose a new experimental method to address this challenge, which we call the contrast-based experimental phenomenological method (CEP). CEP proceeds in four steps: (i) front-loading phenomenology, (ii) online second-personal interview, (iii) questionnaire survey, and (iv) hypotheses testing. It differs from other experimental phenomenological methods in that it takes advantage of phenomenal contrasts in collecting phenomenological data. In this paper, we verify the validity and productivity of this method by applying it to binocular rivalry (BR). The study contributes to empirical research on BR in three respects. First, it provides additional evidence for existing propositions about the subjective features of BR: e.g. the proposition that the temporal dynamics of the experience depend upon subject-dependent parameters such as attentional change. Second, it deepens our understanding of the spatiotemporal structures of the transition phase of BR. Third, it elicits new research questions about depth experience and individual differences in BR. The presence of such contributions demonstrates the validity and productivity of CEP.

Keywords: binocular rivalry, consciousness, phenomenology, experimental phenomenology, phenomenological method


Introduction

Cognitive science typically conceptualizes psychological phenomena in terms of cognitive functions and seeks to explain them in terms of computational and neural mechanisms (Thagard 2019). However, many psychological phenomena also have subjective features that are not immediately captured in functionalist terms. For instance, emotion is often characterized in terms of a set of functions to use rewards and punishers to guide behavior (Rolls 2013, chap. 3). But it is questionable whether the nature of emotion can be fully captured by those functions, for there is also something it is like to have emotions (such as the tangible feeling of being sad, happy, or angry) (Nagel 1974). Any complete theory of a psychological phenomenon should develop cognitive and neural models that do not only account for their cognitive functions but also accommodate their subjective features.

This gives rise to a methodological question: How can objective science identify the subjective features of experience? One simple method is to ask one to report what they experience. For instance, we can determine whether one sees a house or a face by asking them to press a button to report which they experience (Tong et al. 1998) or whether one is aware of a change in a screen by asking them to verbally report any change of which they are aware (Rensink et al. 1997). Another method is to instruct participants to carry out a task from which we can infer what experience they have. For instance, we can determine when one experiences two patches as having the same color by instructing to control the color of one patch so that it matches the other patch (Sarkar et al. 2010) or can scale some aspects of one’s sensory experience, such as brightness and loudness, by instructing to assign numbers to represent their magnitudes (Teghtsoonian 2015). These methods work very well for subjective features of experience that are fragmentally extracted from the whole experience (e.g. a change in a screen or the hue of color patches). However, it is difficult to apply them directly to more elusive features that are not readily available to introspective observation (e.g. holistic features of the spatiotemporal structure of experience). This suggests that additional methods are required to uncover these more elusive subjective features of experience.

Phenomenology is a philosophical tradition that is centrally concerned with systematically exploring such elusive features of consciousness. In recent years, researchers have proposed various methods that combine phenomenology and experimental psychology to expand the scope of scientific psychology (for a concise overview of experimental phenomenological methods, see Miyahara et al. 2020). For example, some propose to train experimental participants in skills to reflect on and describe their experience, which will allow experimenters to obtain more sophisticated subjective reports (Varela 1996; Lutz 2002; Miyahara et al. 2020). Another proposed method is to interview experimental participants systematically about their experience (Petitmengin 2006; Valenzuela Moguillansky et al. 2013). Alternatively, some have developed detailed questionnaires designed to capture the subjective features of target experiences (Pekala 1991; Studerus et al. 2010). Nevertheless, it is fair to say that experimental phenomenology is still a very rudimentary domain of inquiry, requiring much methodological improvement.

In this paper, we propose a novel experimental schema to be added to the toolbox of experimental phenomenology. The proposed schema consists of the following four steps: (i) Front-loading phenomenology: Formulate hypotheses about the subjective features of the target psychological phenomenon; (ii) Online second-personal interview: Conduct a face-to-face interview to participants who are undergoing the psychological phenomenon in question in order to collect descriptions of its subjective features; (iii) Questionnaire survey: Obtain responses to a questionnaire designed to test said hypotheses from the participants; (iv) Hypothesis-testing: Evaluate said hypotheses based on the data acquired through the second and third steps.

A distinctive feature of our experimental schema is that it creatively incorporates the method of phenomenal contrast. Some philosophers have suggested that disputes about subjective features, which cannot be settled in terms of direct introspection of the psychological phenomenon at issue, may be resolved by comparing it with similar phenomena (Kriegel 2007; Siegel 2007). The idea is that the subjective features of a psychological phenomenon that are hard to notice by simple introspection can be brought into relief by contrasting it with similar psychological phenomena. Our proposal employs the phenomenal contrast method in the second and third steps of the experimental schema described above, namely the data collection processes. The online second-personal interview is designed to make the participants describe the subjective features of a target psychological phenomenon in comparison to a similar yet different kind of experience. The questionnaire is also designed to take advantage of the comparison. This focus on phenomenal contrast makes our experimental schema distinct from other phenomenological/qualitative psychological approaches such as microphenomenology (Petitmengin 2006; Petitmengin et al. 2019; Valenzuela-Moguillansky and Vásquez-Rosati 2019) and experience sampling methods (Larson and Csikszentmihalyi 1983; Hurlburt and Akhter 2006). Furthermore, our experimental schema can be easily incorporated into a standard psychophysical framework in which two psychological conditions with different target variables are put in contrast (e.g. tracking a visual target with full attention and with diverted attention). We call our experimental schema the contrast-based experimental phenomenological method (CEP).

The objective of this paper is to demonstrate the validity and productivity of CEP. The validity of CEP is questioned if it delivers results that are in conflict with robust existing findings about the subjective features of a target psychological phenomenon. The productivity of CEP is questioned if it fails to advance existing research on a psychological phenomenon in any direction. CEP is thus considered to be valid and productive if it delivers broadly consistent results with robust existing findings about a target psychological phenomenon and provide new understanding and insights about its subjective features.

To test the validity and productivity of CEP, we apply it to explore the subjective features of binocular rivalry (BR). In BR, participants are presented with different monocular stimuli to each of their eyes. Then instead of seeing a stable mixed image of the two stimuli, they have a visual experience of ongoing alternations between the two images. BR has recently attracted much attention in cognitive neuroscience, in particular, consciousness studies (Miller 2013; Blake et al. 2014; Wu 2018, sec. 5.2).

There is a fair amount of studies that examine the subjective features of BR. The subjective aspect of BR has typically been characterized in terms of the dominance of each image and its alternation. Many pieces of research have explored how the dominance duration and the alternation rate change depending on the types of stimuli and other variables (Fahle 1982; Blake et al. 1992; Carter et al. 2007; Pelekanos et al. 2012; Brascamp et al. 2015; Paris et al. 2017; Skerswetat et al. 2018). In particular, many have focused on the influence of attention on the dominance duration and the alternation rate (Ooi and He 1999; Paffen and Van der Stigchel 2010; Brascamp and Blake 2012; Moreno-Sánchez et al. 2019). However, the subjective aspect of BR is not fully captured in terms of the dominance duration of each image and the alternation rate. The perception of brightness in BR (Levelt 1965, chap. 3) and the perceptual grouping in BR (Kovács et al. 1996; Alais et al. 2016; Stuit et al. 2017) have been studied. In addition, much attention has recently been attracted to the transition phase of the alternation between two images in BR (Wilson et al. 2001; Klink et al. 2013, sec. 2). It was found that the transition phase has two distinctive subjective features. First, the percept in BR changes “in a wave-like fashion, originating at one region of a figure and spreading from there throughout the rest of the figure” (Blake and Logothetis 2002, 3, emphasis added). Second, sometimes we see two images at the same time but at different depths—i.e. as if one figure is transparent and we are seeing the other figure through it (Yang et al. 1992).

Our experiment demonstrates that CEP is both a valid and productive method of inquiry. First, its results fit with the existing propositions about the subjective features of BR, in particular about the influence of attention. This consistency indicates the validity of CEP. Second, it deepens our understanding of the spatiotemporal structure of the wave-like transition phase of BR. Third, it elicits new research questions about the subjective features of BR, in particular about the depth experience in BR. The second and third contributions suggest the productivity of CEP. We shall conclude that CEP is a useful addition to the toolbox of experimental phenomenology, well suited to explore subjective features of experience that are difficult to capture by untrained introspective observation.


Material and Methods


Participants

Twenty healthy participants (age 20–28, mean = 23.3; 10 females) were recruited from the subject pool at Osaka University. They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. None of them majored in philosophy (including Phenomenology as a philosophical discipline) or psychology. Although two participants reported that they had heard of BR, none of them experienced it first-hand before participating in the experiment. Informed consent was obtained from all the participants prior to the experiment. The experiment was conducted at the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT). The experimental protocol was approved by the ethics and safety committees of NICT.


Stimuli


Apparatus

Visual stimuli were presented on a liquid-crystal display (Flexscan EV2780, Nanao, Japan) using PsychoPy (Peirce 2007) under Mac OS. The participants observed the stimuli from the distance of 90 cm between their eyes and the display through a mirror stereoscope (T.K.K.129, Takei Scientific Instruments Co. Ltd., Japan). The stereoscope was used to present the left half of the display exclusively to the left eye and the right half of the display exclusively to the right eye. For each participant, the eye holes and mirrors of the stereoscope were adjusted prior to the experiment so that the stimuli presented separately to both eyes were precisely fused.


Binocular rivalry

BR stimuli consisted of Gabor patches [1.7 cycles/degree of visual angle (c/dva), contrast = 100%]. Two patches were dichoptically presented on a gray background (34.5 cd/m2). Grating orientation differed between eyes (−45° and 45° from the vertical axis). Both patches were presented within a black ring frame (8.7 dva) to facilitate alignment of the eyes. Participants viewed the patches while maintaining fixation to a small green dot (0.2 dva) in the center of each patch. In addition to the fact that Gabor patches have been used extensively in existing BR studies (for instance, see Bonneh et al. 2001; Tsuchiya and Koch 2005; Brascamp and Blake 2012), there are two reasons for choosing gray-scale Gabor patches for our experimental research. First, we wanted the BR stimuli to be as simple as possible, because if they had more perceptible features such as hues or meaningful objects (e.g. house, face), the participants could focus more on such superficial features of the stimuli rather than subjective features distinctive of BR. Second, we wanted to induce BR-experiences with subjectively detectable transition phase, because the subjective aspect of transition phases of BR has been considered to be important for understanding dynamic neural processes underlying visual perception (Wilson et al. 2001; Knapen et al. 2011; Klink et al. 2013, sec. 2). The gray-scale Gabor patches satisfied these two requirements.


False binocular rivalry

False binocular rivalry (FBR) stimuli were animations that mimic the transformation of the image experienced when viewing BR stimuli. The animation was generated by the time-varying, position-dependent blending of the two Gabor patches composing the BR stimuli. While the BR stimuli were presented dichoptically and induced illusional transformation of the image (illusional in the sense that there is no figure that actually transforms), the FBR stimuli were presented binocularly and induced actual transformation of the figure by the animation. The other stimulus settings for the FBR stimuli were the same as used for the BR stimuli. Participants viewed the stimuli while maintaining fixation on the center dot.

FBR stimuli were designed to induce experiences that closely resemble genuine BR-experiences, which will allow us to produce phenomenal contrasts that can effectively illuminate the latter’s subjective features. In the experiment explained in Task procedure section, the participants were instructed to describe the subjective features of BR that were not present in FBR. Unless FBR is similar enough to BR, the comparison is not effective in revealing the distinctive features of BR that are difficult to notice by simple introspection. For instance, if FBR continued to transform at a constant speed, this would not be very helpful for the participants to explore the temporal features of BR in depth: they would simply notice the irregularity of the timings of transformations of BR, which is easily noticed by simple introspection without any contrasting experience. However, if FBR is designed to exhibit an irregular temporal pattern of transformation, then the participants are led to explore the experiential difference between BR and FBR more carefully and thereby capture subtler features of BR, such as how the transformation starts and ends, which are difficult to notice without the comparison.

The spatial patterns of transformations of FBR stimuli were produced by the random transition across eight different blending patterns of the two Gabor patches; those blending patterns were chosen to replicate the transition phase of BR (reference patterns). The first and second reference patterns were the original unblended patches used for the BR stimuli. The third and fourth reference patterns were the images in which the two patches were fully overlapped with each other: one was blended in the ratio of 1:4 and the other was blended in the ratio of 4:1. The fifth and sixth reference patterns were the images each of which consisted of the halves of the two patches conjoined with a blurred boundary; the boundary was tilted −45° or 45° from the vertical axis. The seventh and eighth reference patterns were the images in which the left half of one patch and the right half of the other patch were conjoined with a blurred boundary. The order of the transition from one pattern to another pattern was pseudo-randomly determined so as to yield all possible transitions with equal probability. In addition, different transition orders were used for each presentation of the FBR stimuli to the participants.

During individual transitions, the temporal patterns of the figure changes were designed to reproduce the dynamics of image transformation during BR. The time course of transitions from one reference pattern to another was generated using a recently developed computational model of BR (Li et al. 2017). This model simulates the dynamics of perceptual competition between two images in BR with attentional modulation and mutual inhibition (for details). This model computes the response strength of two hypothetical neural populations corresponding to left- and right-eye perceptions from time to time. The time-varying response strength can be regarded as the time course of perceptual dominance of each rivalry image presented dichoptically. Although the original model was applied to the alternation between two rivalry images, the present study used the computed time course of perceptual dominance to determine the blending rate of the reference patterns during transitions. For example, at a given time point in the transition from a reference pattern A to a reference pattern B, if the model computed the dominance of 0.8 for a left-eye image and 0.2 for a right-eye image, the reference patterns A and B were blended in the ratio of 0.8:0.2 (=4:1). This procedure produced animations of figure transformation varying from time to time with various spatial patterns. Our codes for generating the FBR stimuli are available at https://github.com/Taiyou/FalseBinocularRivalryProject. The movie clip of the FBR stimuli is available at https://vimeo.com/375339505.


Working hypothesis

Front-loading phenomenology is a recent strategy for incorporating the analytic perspective of philosophical phenomenology into experimental psychology (Gallagher 2003; Gallagher and Zahavi 2012). Phenomenology is a philosophical tradition founded in the beginning of the 20th century by Edmund Husserl and further developed by following philosophers, such as Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. On a standard interpretation, its central characteristic lies in its distinctive interest in investigating conscious experience from the first-personal perspective of the conscious subject. To this end, the phenomenological method requires that studies of consciousness proceed by suspending or “bracketing” all theoretical and pre-theoretical assumptions concerning the metaphysical nature of consciousness (for more discussion, Gallagher and Zahavi 2012, 21–31; Smith 2018).

Recently, there is increasing interest in incorporating the methodology and the insights of this philosophical tradition into scientific approaches to mind and cognition (Gallagher and Zahavi 2012; Kaufer and Chemero 2015; Varela 2017). The notion of front-loading phenomenology has been proposed in this context as one way of achieving such interdisciplinary collaboration. Its basic idea is to use phenomenological reflection as a heuristic device for producing working hypotheses regarding psychological phenomena in designing experimental studies (Gallagher and Zahavi 2012, 44–45). This can be done either by drawing on phenomenological analyses developed by classical phenomenological philosophers or by attempting first-hand phenomenological reflections upon psychological phenomena of interest. The current experiment employed the latter approach: It started by formulating eight hypotheses concerning subjective features of BR based primarily on the experimenters’ first-hand experience of the phenomenon; the following experiment was designed to test these hypotheses against qualitative and quantitative data obtained through interview and questionnaire. This sub-section introduces the eight hypotheses, which are each labeled as follows: (i) temporal indeterminacy; (ii) diachronic spatial indeterminacy; (iii) synchronic spatial indeterminacy; (iv) instability; (v) spatial disunity; (vi) sensitivity to subject’s change; (viii) ambiguous depth; and (viii) difficulty of fixation.


Temporal indeterminacy

A major part of BR-experience consists of a dynamic transformation of the experienced content. As researchers of BR indicate, these transformations do not happen instantly “like successively exposed snapshots of one image and then the other” (Blake and Logothetis 2002, 3), but rather, they only happen through some stretch of time.

The first hypothesis concerns a subjective feature of the transition phase:

Temporal indeterminacy: Transformations in BR lack temporal determination.

Sometimes temporally extended events are perceived as something defined by a clearly determinate beginning and end. When you see a falling row of dominoes, e.g. you will see the moving pattern start at one point and finish at another point in time. Transformations of the percept in BR, however, lack specific start points or end points in time and hence fail to deliver a sense of temporal determinacy. This holds even when we pay careful attention to the whole transformation process including the experiences of each stable image before and after the transition. The transition phase of BR is typically described as “a wave-like intrusion of the alternative percept” (Klink et al. 2013, 311). Temporal indeterminacy can be counted as a characteristic of such wave-like transformations of BR.


Diachronic spatial indeterminacy

The second hypothesis indicates another feature of the transition phase of BR:

Diachronic spatial indeterminacy: Transformations in BR lack spatial determination.

Sometimes temporally extended events are perceived as having definite spatial properties, such as spatial trajectories and spatial boundaries. Once again, when seeing a falling row of dominoes, you will see the moving pattern start at a specific point and finish at another point in space. This hypothesis holds, however, that transformations in BR lack such determinate spatial properties and hence the transition phase of BR fails to deliver a sense of spatial determinacy; this feature is discussed in van Ee (2011). The diachronic spatial indeterminacy can also be counted as a characteristic of the wave-like transformations of BR.


Synchronic spatial indeterminacy

Each moment in the course of undergoing BR consists of a static experience of an image. The third hypothesis addresses a subjective feature of the static experience in BR:

Synchronic spatial indeterminacy: the content of static experiences in BR is spatially indeterminate.

Sometimes objects including 2D figures are perceived as having determinate spatial properties. For example, a coffee cup is typically experienced as having determinate spatial properties about its shape and location. This hypothesis states, however, that the content experienced at a particular moment in BR is spatially indeterminate. That is, a Gabor patch (or the mixture of two dissimilar Gabor patches) is experienced as being more obscure and indeterminate in BR compared with the experience of seeing it in non-BR conditions.


Instability

Instability: the content of BR-experience is prone to small and irregular changes so that it is experienced as being unstable.

Even during the relatively stable phases of BR-experience, it is prone to have small and irregular changes in its content. When an experienced content corresponds to either of the monocular stimuli, the BR-experience is very similar to the experience of seeing the stimulus in question with both eyes. Even in that stable phase, the content of BR continuously exhibits small changes in an irregular manner; it is sometimes experienced as being unstably vibrating. Instability may be related to the increase of microsaccades in BR (Sabrin and Kertesz 1980).


Spatial disunity

Spatial disunity: The alternation between two figures in BR is not always experienced as occurring on a single plane.

When seeing 2D figure transforming on a screen, the transformation appears to occur on a single plane. This hypothesis holds, in contrast, that the transformations in BR are not spatially unified in the same way. In the course of BR, e.g. there are phases in which the two figures corresponding to the two monocular stimuli are “both […] visible but appear to be located at different depth planes” (Yang et al., 47). It is as if one figure is transparent and we are seeing the other figure through it. The transformations and alternations in BR are sometimes experienced as being spatially disunified, as not occurring on the same single plane.


Sensitivity to subject’s change

Sensitivity to subject’s change: Transformations in BR are easily affected by the change of the subject’s conditions.

When seeing a 2D figure transforming, the patterns and timings of the transformation are not affected by the small changes of subject’s conditions such as attentional shifts and eye blinks. This hypothesis holds, in contrast, that the patterns and timings of transformations in BR are affected by such changes of the subject. This characteristic of BR has been widely discussed in BR studies (Ooi and He 1999; van Dam and van Ee 2005, Paffen and Van der Stigchel 2010; Hancock et al. 2012; Moreno-Sánchez et al. 2019).


Ambiguous depth

Ambiguous depth: The experienced depth of the figure is ambiguous in BR.

According to this hypothesis, the figures in BR are experienced as being out there, in front of our eyes, but without being in a particular distance from the viewpoint. This hypothesis can also be reasoned from the finding that there are phases in which the two figures corresponding to the two monocular stimuli are both visible but appear to be located at different depth planes (Yang et al., 47).


Difficulty of fixation

Difficulty of fixation: The experienced content of BR denies fixation.

While being presented with BR or FBR stimuli, the experimental participants are instructed to fixate on a fixation point located at the center of their visual field. But fixing one’s gaze on one point of the experiential content is more difficult in BR. If this proves to be an intersubjectively verifiable phenomenon, it may be seen as an experiential effect of a known fact about BR stimuli that they cause tiny eye movements and pupillary dilations not detected in non-BR conditions (Sabrin and Kertesz 1980; Blake et al. 2014, 6–7).


Task procedure

The experiment consisted of three parts. First, we instructed the participants to perform a BR-FBR discrimination task. Second, we asked them to describe the experiential difference between BR and FBR. Third, we conducted a questionnaire survey to the same participants to collect quantitative data concerning their experiences of BR and FBR.


BR–FBR discrimination

In the BR–FBR discrimination task, the participants were instructed to distinguish BR and FBR based on their experiences. On each trial, either BR or FBR stimuli were presented through the mirror stereoscope. The participants were required to verbally report whether they were actually seeing a transformation (FBR) or were seeing a mere appearance of a transformation (BR). Note that participants were just told that there are two kinds of experiences, one in which they see actual transformations occurring on the screen and another in which they see a mere appearance of transformations that do not actually occur on the screen; they did not have any further explanation as to what BR is. This design was intended to avoid the top-down biases on BR-experiences that may be caused by the participants’ expectations of what BR-experiences would be like (Lush et al. 2019). Immediately after the verbal report, the stimuli disappeared and the trial ended with no feedback about the correct answer. Although this means that each trial could last forever as long as the participants did not make a verbal report, we instructed them to make a verbal response as soon as they discriminated the stimuli and no participant spent an unreasonably large amount of time before making a response (for details of response time, see Task performance section). Across trials, the two stimuli were delivered in a pseudo-random order with equal probability (the participants were not informed of the fact that they have equal probability).

Every participant completed 10 successive trials of BR–FBR discrimination. If a participant made consistent judgments in the last five trials regarding the presented stimulus types (in the sense that two types of stimuli were consistently judged to be different regardless of whether the judgments are correct), the task was terminated after the 10th trial. Those who did not make consistent judgments in the last 5 trials went through the second round of 10 successive trials. If she made consistent judgments in the last five trials in the second round, the task was terminated there. Otherwise, the participant is sent to the final round, which we called the two-alternative discrimination, in which she was successively presented with a BR and an FBR stimulus and instructed to judge which was the case of actually seeing a transformation (FBR).

This discrimination task has three purposes. The first is to motivate the participants to concentrate on the subjective features of BR that are not present in FBR [since it is in general difficult for untrained people to properly focus on the subjective aspects of psychological phenomena (Miyahara et al. 2020)]. The second is to confirm that FBR is similar enough to BR to the extent that some participants sometimes mistake FBR for BR (see False binocular rivalry section). The third is to rule out the participants who lack the capacity to experientially discriminate BR from FBR (see Online second-personal interview section for the reason for this exclusion).


Online second-personal interview

In recent consciousness studies, second-personal interview has often been employed to elicit rich and reliable phenomenological reports from experimental participants who do not have relevant background knowledge (Petitmengin et al. 2007; Valenzuela Moguillansky et al. 2013; Høffding and Martiny 2016). We also adopted the second-personal interview to obtain descriptive data about BR- and FBR-experience. While there have been a few attempts to ask experimental participants to describe their experiences of BR (Cosmelli and Thompson 2007; Knapen et al. 2011), there is no attempt to conduct a systematic online second-personal interview for studying the subjective aspect of BR.

The interview consisted of three steps. During the whole interview, the participants were free to request the experimenter to present them with either the BR or FBR stimulus. This allowed them to describe their experience “online” without needing to recall past experiences.

In the first step, the participants were instructed to describe how they distinguished one type of experiences that they judged to be the case of seeing a mere appearance of a transformation (BR) and the other type of experiences that they judged to be the case of actually seeing a transformation (FBR). The reason for excluding the participants who fail the discrimination task is that this instruction works properly only for the participants who could correctly discriminate the experiences of BR and FBR. This question format allowed the participants to naturally focus primarily on the distinctive features of the two types of experience.

In the second step, they were followed-up by “content-empty questions” that only request clarifications of words or expressions that were used in the descriptions given in the first step (Petitmengin and Bitbol 2009, 385). For instance, we asked questions such as:

You stated that you had the impression that the transformation started from one side and gradually proceeded, could you explain this impression more concretely?You stated that the experienced figure is a bit shaky and wobbly. Could you explain what you mean by this in more detail?

The purpose of introducing this method was to enrich the descriptive data without inducing biases.

In the third step, we conducted a “semi-structured interview” that explicitly targeted specific aspects of the experiences. In particular, we asked the participants to describe the differences between the two kinds of experiences, BR and FBR, in regard to the way in which the figures look to them, the way in which they are looking at the figures, and the way in which they feel during the experiences. The first two aspects roughly correspond to what Husserl analyzed as the “noematic” and “noetic” aspects of conscious experience (Gallagher and Zahavi 2012). The last aspect was added to allow the participants to note other features of their experience, which did not seem to answer the first two questions. When the answers to these questions were unclear or undetailed, once again, the participants were followed-up by content-empty questions for clarification.


Questionnaire survey

A questionnaire survey was also conducted to collect quantitative data about the subjective features of BR and FBR. The participants could not see each stimulus when answering the questionnaire. The participants filled in the questionnaire by writing. Except for the question 3, it used a scale of agreement from –3 to 3 (a seven-point Likert scale), which consisted of “strongly disagree” (–3), “disagree” (–2), “weakly disagree” (–1), “no opinion” (0), “weakly agree” (1), “agree” (2), and “strongly agree” (3). The questionnaire consisted of 25 questions. Three questions of them (1–3) were designed to evaluate the difficulty of the discrimination task. The third question about the accuracy rate includes the options of 0–15%, 15–30% and 30–45% to cover the cases where participants consistently mistook BR for FBR in the discrimination task but noticed at some later point of the experiment that they made such mistakes. The remaining 22 questions (4–25) were designed to probe whether the working hypotheses applied to the participant’s experience. The participants were asked to respond to each question carefully by remembering the two kinds of experiences that they had during the discrimination task and the interview period.


Data analysis

A phenomenological analysis was conducted of the descriptive data collected through the online second-personal interview, while statistical analysis was performed on the participants’ responses to the questionnaire.


Phenomenological analysis

The method of “descriptive phenomenological analysis” was adapted for this experiment to analyze the descriptive data. The method, also known as “the modified Husserlian approach” (Giorgi 2009), was developed by the phenomenological psychologist Amedeo Giorgi and is extensively used in the Duquesne School of phenomenological psychology. The analytic procedure consists of four stages (Langdridge 2007, 85–90):

The first stage is to read through each description to grasp its overall meaning. This stage is deemed important because different participants often use the same words to mean different things or different words to mean the same thing. Hence, what each part of the text means is determined not just by the lexical definitions of the words, but rather contextually in reference to the whole text.

The second stage is to break the descriptions down to distinct “units of meaning.” The goal of this stage is to attempt a parsing that is most relevant to the purpose of the experiment. In the current experiment, the primary task was to discern passages, phrases, and expressions that were more or less related to the working hypotheses. This does not mean that only the parts of descriptions that could be interpreted as supporting the working hypotheses were picked up; rather, the point was to tag every part of descriptions that could be relevant to the working hypotheses, including those that could potentially conflict with the working hypotheses.

The third stage is to assess the psychological significance of the meaning-units. In the current experiment, this was achieved indirectly by holding up each meaning-unit against the working hypotheses. In this stage, each meaning-unit was evaluated in regard to whether it supports/conflicts with each working hypothesis.

The fourth stage is to produce a general structural description of the experience. The orthodox approach is to generate structural accounts of the experience in question for each participant’s descriptive data and then to compare them to arrive at the most general structural account. In the current experiment, however, this last step was not taken because the purpose of the qualitative data analysis was not to develop a new account of the general structure of BR-experience, but rather to test the working hypotheses about it already generated through the front-loading method.

One final adaptation was that while Giorgi’s method is typically conducted by an individual analyst, we performed the analysis collectively. Each of the four authors conducted up to the first and second stages of analysis on five participants’ descriptions. After that, the examination of the validity of each parsing and assessment of the meaning-units were conducted through discussions among the four of us.

The examples of descriptions that can be counted as positive and negative evidence for each hypothesis were listed in advance. The examples helped us to carry out the whole phenomenological analysis (Hypotheses testing section).


Quantitative analysis

Statistical tests on the questionnaire scores were performed to quantify differences between BR- and FBR-experiences with regard to the phenomenological working hypotheses. Because seven of the eight hypotheses corresponded to multiple items in the questionnaire, answers to these items were averaged within each hypothesis for each participant. Then, the scores for each hypothesis were compared between the BR and FBR conditions across participants. The correction for multiple comparisons was performed using false discovery rate (FDR; Benjamini and Hochberg 1995).


Results


Task performance

Twenty participants performed the BR–FBR discrimination task. Each participant underwent up to three rounds of trials. The first two rounds consisted of 10 trials of BR–FBR discrimination, while the final round only included one trial (see Materials and Methods section). Nine out of 20 participants made consistent responses to the discrimination tasks in the first round. The rest of the 11 participants proceeded to the second round, out of which 6 participants gave consistent responses throughout the trials. The remaining five participants completed the two-alternative discrimination in the final round. No participant made consistent incorrect responses in the first round. One participant did so in the second round. In the final round, 1/5 participant failed to make the correct response. Since these two participants were regarded as unable to correctly discriminate BR- and FBR-experiences, the interview and questionnaire data from them were excluded from the data analyses.

For the participants who completed the task at the end of the first round, the mean correct rate was 88%, which was significantly higher than chance level (i.e. 50%; paired t-test, P < 0.0001). For the participants who completed the task at the end of second or third round, the mean correct rate in the first and second rounds was 70% and 83%, respectively, which were also significantly higher than chance (P < 0.0005); the rate tended to improve as the round proceeded although the improvement was not significant (paired t-test, P = 0.104). These indicate that almost all of the participants carried out BR–FBR discrimination with high accuracy, though they sometimes made a mistake in the discrimination task.

Overall, the response time on individual trials ranged between 1.6 and 55.2 (mean = 13.2) seconds. The response time averaged within each participant ranged between 6.9 and 21.1 (mean = 13.6) seconds. The mean response time differed neither between BR and FBR trials (mean = 14.8 vs. 12.3 s; paired t-test, P = 0.111) nor between when the participants felt that they were seeing BR and when they felt that they were seeing FBR (mean = 14.2 vs. 12.8 s; P = 0.261). These indicate that response time is unlikely to relate with the difference of BR- and FBR-experiences.

The questionnaire scores on the questions 1–3 also supported that the participants could discriminate the BR and FBR stimuli. The participants were agreeable to the question 1; their scores on the question were significantly higher than 0 (mean = 1.89; paired t-test, P < 0.0001). However, the scores on the question 2 indicate that the discrimination was not too easy for the participants; the scores were not significantly different from 0 (P = 0.355). In addition, the observation that the participants tended to underestimate their own task performance also indicates the difficulty of the discrimination; the estimated correct rate in the question 3 was significantly lower than the actual correct rate (P < 0.05). (However, this indication is not conclusive because the confidence rate about task performance may not correspond to the actual difficulty of the task. Note also that five participants chose either 0–15%, 15–30%, or 30–45% despite the fact that they did not explicitly behave like they started to suspect at some point of the experiment that they consistently mistook BR for FBR. This suggests that the participants misunderstood the statistical meaning of the question 3.)


Hypotheses testing

The working hypotheses were tested against the interview data (interview-based testing) and against the questionnaire data (questionnaire-based testing). The data from the two participants who could not correctly discriminate BR and FBR were excluded from the hypotheses testing.

The interview-based testing proceeded in three steps. First, we listed two categories of possible descriptive contents for each hypothesis: (i) Kinds of descriptions that the participants are expected to produce if each hypothesis is correct (expected descriptions, ED) and (ii) those that they are unlikely to produce under the same condition (unexpected descriptions, UD). Both categories included descriptive contents both about BR and FBR. Expected descriptions for BR were considered to be unexpected descriptions for FBR and vice versa. Second, each participant was tagged either as ED group (if they made only expected descriptions), UD group (if they made only unexpected descriptions), Neutral (if they made neither). No participant made both expected and unexpected descriptions for any given hypothesis. Finally, the hypotheses were evaluated based on these tags. A hypothesis was considered to be supported by the experiment if (i) none were tagged as UD group and (ii) more than 6 participants (one-third of the valid participants) were tagged as ED group. The two conditions were to justify that each working hypothesis is likely to hold for BR-experiences in general. Since there is no conventional standard to test a general hypothesis about a specific subjective feature of experiences based on the interview data, this standard was set out arbitrarily, but it is conservative enough to test the validity of the hypothesis.

The results of the interview testing are summarized in. The results of the questionnaire testing are summarized in. The following sections detail the results for each phenomenological hypothesis.


Temporal indeterminacy

The first hypothesis that transformations in BR lack temporal determination was supported by both the interview-based testing and the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Eight participants were tagged as ED; no participant was tagged as UD. Here are two examples of ED:1-1 This one [BR], I don’t get the timing when the change occurs. [This] is like, I don’t get it, but I find myself already seeing something different.1-2 It’s not clear like [in BR], you’re not sure if it has changed or not, how can I put it, it’s not a clear change like the second image [FBR], but you have a sense that it goes back and forth as it changes. Um it’s like, not a clear change, so you have the impression that it hasn’t really changed.1-1 indicates that the participant could not identify the timing of the transformation. The phrase “I find myself already seeing” suggests that the start point in time was not registered in the experience. 1-2 shows that the participant felt the temporal trajectories of the transformations were unclear in BR. That it delivered the sense of “going back and forth” particularly suggests that when they started and ended were unclear to her. The description “so you have the impression that it hasn’t really changed” can be interpreted not as literally meaning that its transformation was not experienced but as just suggesting that it was the case of BR, considering the instruction of discrimination task, namely the instruction to verbally report whether they were actually seeing a transformation or were seeing a mere appearance of a transformation. The latter case can be described as the one in which the image does not really change.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis exhibited statistical significance (P < 0.05, FDR-corrected paired t-test).


Diachronic spatial indeterminacy

The second hypothesis that transformations in BR lack spatial determination was supported by both the interview-based testing and the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Nine participants were tagged as ED; no participant was tagged as UD. Here are two examples of ED:2-1 The lines change smoothly [in BR]. It’s hard to tell where the change happened. Once you think the whole image has the same kind of lines, but then a part of it changes its direction, but then once again all the lines are directed in the opposite or in a new direction, such that I can’t describe it clearly like ‘it changed here in such and such a way’ as you see the image.2-2 When each section changes separately [in FBR], I see the borders between the sections very clearly, and I’m like “Ah the border line lies here.”In 2-1, the phrase “it’s hard to tell where the change happened” clearly suggests that it was unclear where the transformation occurred. Likewise, the description of “I cannot describe it clearly like ‘it changed here in such and such a way’ as you see the image” suggests that it was unclear how the figure changed in shape and/or direction. The example 2-2 shows that it was clear in FBR where the boundary between a changing area and an unchanging area is, which suggests that it was unclear in BR.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed statistical significance (P < 0.05, FDR-corrected paired t-test).


Synchronic spatial indeterminacy

The third hypothesis that the content of static experiences in BR is spatially indeterminate was neither adequately supported by the interview-based testing nor the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Nine participants were tagged as ED, but two participants were tagged as UD. Here are two examples of ED.3-1 This one [BR] is more like out of focus.3-2 I think the distinctive feature [of BR] is that it really feels like I’m seeing the same pattern a bit blurred all the way. There’s a bit of a blur and the way it looks, it feels like as if I’m seeing a different pattern, as if the picture is unstable.In 3-1, the phrase “[BR] is more like out of focus” suggests that it looked blurred/obscure. In 3-2, likewise, the phrase “it really feels like I’m seeing the same pattern a bit blurred all the way” indicates that the figure looked blurred/obscure in BR.In contrast, here are two examples of UD:3-3 I have the impression that the contours of the black lines are blurrier in the tenth image [FBR].3-4 [In BR] It was like seeing black and white bands constantly, continuing, arranged diagonally. Sometimes I blink and it’s as if identical patterns intersecting with each other like a triangle, but I have no impression that the image is blurred.In 3-3, the phrase “the contours of the black lines are blurrier in [FBR]” suggests that the experienced figure looked clear in BR. In 3-4, the phrase “I have no impression that the image is blurred” suggests that the figure looked clear in BR.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed no statistical significance.


Instability

The fourth hypothesis that the content of BR-experience is prone to small and irregular changes so that it is experienced as being unstable was supported by the questionnaire-based testing, but it was not supported by the interview-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Seven participants were tagged as ED, but two participants were tagged as UD. Here are two examples of ED.4-1 I get the impression that the whole image is vibrating [in BR].4-2 The way it looks changes irregularly and unsteadily [in BR].4-1 clearly suggests that the figure was vibrating in BR. 4-2 indicates that the content of BR-experience changes irregularly and unsteadily.In contrast, here is an example of UD.4-3 The direction of change is determined, or maybe predictable [in BR], which makes it easier to see, but the tenth image [FBR] shows quite a few patterns, making it harder to read which way it’s going to switch, and I guess it is more thrilling because of this.The italic parts of 4-3 indicate that the content of FBR-experience changes more irregularly than that of BR-experience does. This is in conflict with the hypothesis of Instability.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed statistical significance (P < 0.05, FDR-corrected paired t-test).


Spatial disunity

The fifth hypothesis that the alternation between two figures in BR is not always experienced as occurring on a single plane was supported by the interview-based testing and the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Eight participants were tagged as ED; no participant was tagged as UD. Here are two examples of ED.5-1 In the ninth image [BR], every time I blink my eyes, it’s like, the diagonal orientations, these, the diagonals descending from the right alternate between coming in front of and going behind the diagonals descending from the left.5-2 The green point and the pattern are more unified [in FBR] than the ninth image [BR]. The ninth image looks like the green point is afloat.The italic parts of 5-1 suggest that the participant felt like two figures were overlapping in BR. 5-2 indicates that the participant felt like the fixation point was not unified with the figure in BR.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed statistical significance (P < 0.05, FDR-corrected paired t-test).


Sensitivity to subject’s change

The sixth hypothesis that transformations in BR are affected by the change of the subject’s conditions was supported by the interview-based testing and the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: 12 participants were tagged as ED; no participant was tagged as UD. Here is an example of ED.6-1 [BR] changes its appearance slightly when I blink my eyes. The tenth one [FBR] […] appeared to change its pattern on the screen’s timing.6-2 [BR] It felt like perhaps the appearance is changing depending on how much effort I put to my eyes.6-1 clearly suggests that the timing of transformation depended on eye blinks. 6-2 also indicates that how the image looks in BR changes depending on the condition of eyes.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed statistical significance (P < 0.05, FDR-corrected paired t-test).


Ambiguous depth

The seventh hypothesis that the experienced depth of the figure is ambiguous in BR is neither supported by the interview-based testing nor by the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: every participant was tagged as Neutral.

Questionnaire-based testing: The category-wise analysis showed statistical insignificance.


Difficulty of fixation

The eighth hypothesis that the experienced content of BR denies fixation was not supported by the interview-based testing and also unsupported by the questionnaire-based testing.

Interview-based testing: Seven participants were tagged as ED; one participant was tagged as UD. Here is an example of ED.8-1 It’s relatively easy to the green point as one [in FBR], but [in BR] the green point doesn’t appear as one unless I try to see it as one.Given that the “green point” means the fixation point, this description clearly suggests that the participant felt difficulty in fixing his/her gaze on the fixation point in BR. In contrast, one participant stated:8-2 Well I first keep my focus on the center, in the first one [BR], and I don’t get tired by keep seeing it, so it’s like I can keep seeing it, or better, I can see it with ease.This description suggests that the participant felt more tired by gazing at the fixation point in FBR.

Questionnaire-based testing: There is no statistical significance.


Discussion

The objective of this study was to introduce and justify CEP as a new experimental phenomenological method to investigate the subjective features of psychological phenomena. CEP proceeds in the following four steps: (i) Front-loading phenomenology (Working hypothesis section), (ii) Online second-personal interview (Online second-personal interview section), (iii) Questionnaire survey (Questionnaire survey section), and (iv) Hypothesis-testing (Hypotheses testing section). CEP employs phenomenal contrast in the experimental design, which distinguishes it from other experimental phenomenological methods, such as microphenomenology and experience sampling methods. We tested the validity and productivity of CEP by applying it to study the subjective features of BR. We first constructed eight hypotheses about the subjective features of BR and then tested them against two sets of phenomenological data obtained through online second-personal interview and questionnaire survey. Out of the eight hypotheses, four were supported by both the interview data and the questionnaire survey; one was only supported by the latter; three were supported by neither.

Among the four hypotheses which gained support from the experiment, temporal indeterminacy and diachronic spatial indeterminacy concern the transition phase of BR, which has attracted much attention in recent studies (Cosmelli and Thompson 2007; Klink et al. 2013, 310–311). Some earlier studies described this aspect of BR as exhibiting a wave-like transformation from one percept to another (Wilson et al. 2001; Blake and Logothetis 2002). Our findings offer a more specific understanding of this wave-like transition by clarifying that it is experienced as having both temporally and spatially indeterminate start and end points. This contribution demonstrates the productivity of CEP. We do not claim, however, that these features are universal among all forms of BR. As van Ee (2011) points out, BR stimuli can be designed to induce BR-experiences which involve transition phases with determinate spatial trajectories. They can also be designed to induce BR-experiences without any transition phase, which are in effect experienced as a sequence of switching between two percepts (Fox and Rasche 1969). Further empirical research is needed to determine the scope of these two hypotheses.

Sensitivity to subject’s change was also supported in the interview-based testing and the questionnaire-based testing. This finding provides additional evidence for the well-established proposition that the patterns and timings of transformations in BR are affected by changes in the subject, such as attentional shifts and eye movements (Ooi and He 1999; van Dam and van Ee 2005, 2006; Paffen and Van der Stigchel 2010; Hancock et al. 2012; Moreno-Sánchez et al. 2019). The consistency of our experimental result with this well-established phenomenological proposition strongly indicates the validity of CEP.

Spatial disunity was also supported both in the interview-based and the questionnaire-based testing. This indicates that the alternation between two figures in BR is not always experienced as occurring on a single plane. This provides additional evidence for the proposition that there are phases in which the two monocular stimuli are “both […] visible but appear to be located at different depth planes” (Yang et al., 47). Note, however, that ambiguous depth was neither supported in interview-based nor questionnaire-based testing. This is puzzling, because if there is a phase in which two figures appear to be located at different depth planes as if one figure is transparent and the other figure is seen through it, then the experienced depth of the figures is expected to be ambiguous. These results, in combination, give rise to novel research questions about the subjective aspect of depth perception in BR: what is the exact subjective character of the phase in which two figures appear to be located at different depth planes? How is depth experienced in BR? Is some level of expertise needed for one to be aware of the ambiguity of depth in BR-experience? Further phenomenological research is needed to address these research questions. The fact that CEP can produce such research questions, which will serve to move BR research forward in new directions, indicates its productivity as a method of inquiry.

Synchronic spatial indeterminacy and Difficulty of fixation were neither adequately supported in the interview-based testing nor the questionnaire-based testing. Instability was supported in the questionnaire-based testing but not in the interview-based testing. Nevertheless, these three hypotheses were not unanimously rejected in the interview-based testing: i.e. they all had a few participants lending supportive descriptions and hence categorized as ED group. This suggests the presence of individual differences in the relevant subjective aspects of BR: namely, how spatially indeterminate the contents of static experiences in BR are, how difficult it is to fix gaze on the fixation point in BR, and how much the content of BR-experience is prone to small and irregular changes. This interpretation of the results is indirectly supported by many findings in BR research showing that there are individual differences in BR-experience (Miller et al. 2003; Kanai et al. 2010; Yamashiro et al. 2014; Bosten et al. 2015). These results lead to new research questions: What is the prevalence of those who experience BR differently from the majority for each of these features? What are the neural, genetic, developmental, psychological, and behavioral factors responsible for these differences? Further research is required to address these research questions.

Finally, we conclude by making two methodological remarks on our research. First, as we saw above, we used black-white Gabor patches in our experiment, and it remains unclear to what extent we can generalize our findings in this study to BRs induced by other kinds of BR stimuli. In fact, no BR stimuli would allow us to establish general claims about the phenomenon. Notice, however, that this is not so much an in-principle problem with CEP as simply indicating a healthy open-endedness of the study: Just as any other form of scientific investigation, experimental phenomenology can approach the essential features of psychological phenomena only through the constant effort of accumulating new data to test and update existing hypotheses.

Second, the results of our experiment also depend on the specific design of FBR stimulus. There are other ways to design FBR stimuli. For instance, some researchers such as Knapen et al. (2011) have used duration-matched replays as FBR stimuli. Duration-matched replays are designed individually based on each participant’s report on the dominance duration of each stimulus and the timing and length of the transition phase in their actual experience of BR, so the replay exhibits the same dynamic profile as that reported during actual rivalry. If we used duration-matched replays to obtain a phenomenal contrast with BR, the participants might have focused on different subjective features. Furthermore, if the FBR resembled the BR to the extent that they are subjectively indiscriminable, we could not collect any description of BR in the framework of CEP. However, this does not indicate that the descriptions acquired by using our FBR stimulus did not correctly capture the subjective aspect of BR. Data collection in CEP certainly depends on the nature of the phenomenal contrast that has been used, and so in this case on the character of the FBR stimulus, but this is not an essential difficulty of the methodology itself. One analogy may be useful to clarify this point. When we try to describe the flavor of vegemite in detail, it is helpful to compare it with other fermented salty food. One can become aware of different aspects of the vegemite flavor by comparing it with several different kinds of food, such as Japanese salted fish guts and Miso. Descriptions of vegemite acquired through comparisons with these foods are not invalidated by the existence of marmite, whose flavor is subjectively indiscriminable from vegemite. Likewise, if two kinds of FBR stimuli differ in some experiential aspects (as in ours and duration-matched replays), one would be aware of different subjective features of BR through comparing it with each kind of FBR. The existence of perfect FBR subjectively indiscriminable from BR, however, does not invalidate descriptions of BR obtained through comparisons with these imperfect FBRs. We can employ different kinds of FBRs for further research, and this is exactly one of the ways to tackle the research questions presented above.

We have argued for the validity and productivity of CEP based on our study of BR employing this proposed method. In principle, CEP can be applied to any psychological phenomenon that experimental psychology addresses. One particularly fruitful area of application is virtual reality: CEP may be used to explore and specify the subjective difference between the experience of virtual reality and non-virtual reality environments; this should help researchers develop virtual reality technologies that can produce a more genuine sense of reality. No doubt, there is much room for improvement in our proposed version of CEP. Yet we suggest that CEP offers a promising experimental schema to explore elusive subjective features of psychological phenomena that are difficult to capture by untrained introspective observation.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Program data of FBR stimuli are available at https://github.com/Taiyou/FalseBinocularRivalryProject. Other data are not publically available.

Conflict of interest statement. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


High-voltage, diffuse delta rhythms coincide with wakeful consciousness and complexity in Angelman syndrome

Joel Frohlich, Lynne M Bird, John Dell’Italia, Micah A Johnson, Joerg F Hipp, Martin M Monti — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7533426, CC BY 4.0.

Neuroscience of Consciousness, Volume 6, Issue 1, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaa005

In the above article, the authors original stated that spectral power was being normalised by log2(Hz) instead of Hz. The results and conclusions of the paper have not been affected. As such, the sentence Spectral power was normalized per octave, i.e., log2(Hz), rather than Hz to account for the logarithmic nature of EEG signals (Buzsáki and Draguhn 2004) on page 3 has now been removed. Additionally, the labels for Fig. 2, Fig. 4, Fig. S1, Fig. S2, Fig. S5, Fig. S7, and Fig. S10 have been changed to Power log10 (μV2/Hz) and the labels in Fig. S3 and Fig. S8 have been changed to log10 [log2(Hz) μV2/Hz. These have all been corrected online. The authors apologise for the error.


Missing the forest because of the trees: slower alternations during binocular rivalry are associated with lower levels of visual detail during ongoing thought

Nerissa Siu Ping Ho, Daniel Baker, Theodoros Karapanagiotidis, Paul Seli, Hao Ting Wang, Robert Leech, Boris Bernhardt, Daniel Margulies et al. — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7533427, CC BY 4.0.

Conscious awareness of the world fluctuates, either through variation in how vividly we perceive the environment, or when our attentional focus shifts away from information in the external environment towards information that we generate via imagination. Our study combined individual differences in experience sampling, psychophysical reports of perception and neuroimaging descriptions of structural connectivity to better understand these changes in conscious awareness. In particular, we examined (i) whether aspects of ongoing thought—indexed via multi-dimensional experience sampling during a sustained attention task—are associated with the white matter fibre organization of the cortex as reflected by their relative degree of anisotropic diffusion and (ii) whether these neurocognitive descriptions of ongoing experience are related to a more constrained measure of visual consciousness through analysis of bistable perception during binocular rivalry. Individuals with greater fractional anisotropy in right hemisphere white matter regions involving the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the cortico-spinal tract, described their ongoing thoughts as lacking external details. Subsequent analysis indicated that the combination of low fractional anisotropy in these right hemisphere regions, with reports of thoughts with high levels of external details, was associated with the shortest periods of dominance during binocular rivalry. Since variation in binocular rivalry reflects differences between bottom-up and top-down influences on vision, our study suggests that reports of ongoing thoughts with vivid external details may occur when conscious precedence is given to bottom-up representation of perceptual information.

Keywords: ongoing thought, binocular rivalry, detail, diffusion tensor imaging, experience sampling, fractional anisotropy


Introduction

Conscious experience varies from moment to moment, and studies using experience sampling suggest that these dissociations can take multiple forms. Sometimes our thoughts switch away from an external task to become focused on personal experiences rather than events in the external environment, or any task being performed (Smallwood and Schooler 2006, Seli et al. 2018). Research suggests states of off-task thought are linked to systems important for attentional focus (Hasenkamp et al. 2012; Turnbull et al. 2019a,b). In particular, it has been recently demonstrated that the ventral attention network is associated with an individual’s ability to regulate the focus of attention during sustained attention in a manner that accounts for the demands imposed by the external environment (Turnbull et al., 2019a, b), a phenomenon known as context regulation (Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna 2013).Using experience sampling in conjunction with the simultaneous recording of neural activity using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), Turnbull et al. (2019a) found that activity in the dorsal prefrontal cortex (BA 9/46) was associated with both being on-task during a working memory task, and also associated with being off-task in a situation when the task demands were lower. In contrast, the same study highlighted that regions of parietal cortex, in the dorsal attention network, was linked to reports of on-task experience across both conditions. We confirmed the dissociations between these two large-scale networks in separate cohort study which found that connectivity of the ventral attention network with sensorimotor cortex was linked to the alignment of experience with task goals (i.e. more on-task experience when task demands are higher, and more off-task thought when demands are lower). In contrast, connectivity of the dorsal attention network with regions of lateral occipital cortex was linked to the on-task state regardless of task context (Turnbull et al. 2019b). This dissociation between different attentional systems in terms of the prioritization of different types of thought, and the representation of different forms of informational content are broadly consistent with theoretical perspectives on the neural basis of different features of ongoing thought (Smallwood and Schooler 2015; Christoff et al. 2016).

Experiences, however, can also fluctuate in the level of detail with which events in the external environment are processed. Recent studies using experience sampling suggest that detailed experiences during sustained attention can depend upon the functioning of the default mode network (DMN). In particular, we found that patterns of detailed thought are more pronounced during working memory tasks and representational similarity analysis demonstrated that, under these conditions, neural signals within regions of the DMN encode this feature of experience (Sormaz et al. 2018). Moreover, individuals who have more detailed task experiences in the laboratory in general show stronger coupling between the DMN and regions of visual cortex (Turnbull et al. 2019b), recruit the posterior cingulate more during periods of self-reference (Murphy et al. 2019) and show greater cortical thickness in the para-hippocampus (Ho et al. 2019). Although a link between the DMN and externally focused experience is surprising given the widely held assumption that the DMN was limited to internally focused, task unrelated experiences (e.g. Fox et al. 2005), this proposed link is nonetheless consistent with more recent findings. For example, studies indicate that people can perform tasks with high levels of efficiency when they are ‘in the zone’ (Esterman et al. 2013; Kucyi et al. 2016) or ‘on autopilot’ (Vatansever et al. 2017a). Thus, understanding the neural mechanisms underlying different patterns of experience is not only important for contemporary accounts of ongoing conscious thought (Smallwood and Schooler 2015) but may also be important for appropriately characterizing the function of different large-scale neural networks.

The current study aimed to elucidate the role that top-down visual processes play in different types of dissociation between ongoing experiences and environmental events. Traditionally, research into conscious experiences has emphasized that it is possible to understand the relationship between subjective awareness and the immediate sensory context using situations of bistable perception (such as the Necker Cube, or the phenomenon of binocular rivalry) because, in such contexts, awareness can change without a concomitant change in sensory input (Crick 1996). Situations of bistable perception provide relatively unambiguous indices of the top-down influence on vision because they discard low-level processes that contribute to the process of perception (e.g. sensory transduction). In this context, the dominance of one image during bistable perception is assumed to reflect the influence of top-down processes on vision. Consistent with the assumption that bistable perception depends on the balance between top-down and bottom-up influences on vision, neuroimaging studies suggest that rivalry depends on both processes taking place in visual regions (Tong et al. 2006) as well as higher-order brain regions (Knapen et al. 2011; Baker et al. 2015). Importantly, both default mode and attention systems are important in binocular rivalry: whereas disruptions to regions of the DMN, such as the posterior parietal lobule, tend to lengthen perceptual alterations during bistable perception (Carmel et al. 2010; Kanai et al. 2011), disruptions to nearby regions of parietal cortex, within the dorsal attention network, shorten perceptual alterations (Kanai et al. 2011).

Our study sought to extend our understanding of naturally occurring changes in ongoing experience by linking them to both changes in the structural organization of the cortex and to indices of the top-down influence on vision as estimated from binocular rivalry alternations. Specifically, we analysed data from a large cohort of individuals who had extensively described the contents of their ongoing experience during a laboratory task (for prior publications, see Sormaz et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Ho et al. 2019; Turnbull et al. 2019a,b) and for whom we also acquired measures of binocular rivalry using a paradigm similar to that used in our prior study (see Baker et al. 2015). These individuals also had measures of structural connectivity provided by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which has highlighted neural processes linked to both binocular rivalry (Genç et al. 2011) and to patterns of ongoing thought in a prior study (Karapanagiotidis et al. 2017). In the study by Karapanagiotidis et al., we found a right-lateralized region of white matter that had greater fractional anisotropy (FA) for individuals who tended to neglect the external environment to imagine events in the past or future instead of those in the here and now. The current study aimed to replicate the association between ongoing experience and the white matter architecture of the right hemisphere in a new set of participants, and explore whether this association was related to the relative balance between top-down and bottom-up influences on vision during binocular rivalry, as indexed by an individual’s reported experience during binocular rivalry.

The left hand panel in describes the paradigm we used to measure ongoing experience during a sustained attention task (top left), as well as the stimuli we used in a separate session to measure binocular rivalry (bottom left). Using these data, in combination with metrics of white matter architecture provided by DTI, we set out to answer two questions: (i) Are individual differences in the pattern of one’s ongoing thoughts reflected in the structure of cortical white matter? And (ii) Are the neurocognitive descriptors for the patterns of ongoing thought related to more precise descriptions of perceptual experience as assessed by measures of binocular rivalry? It is important to note that, in our study, we did not measure ongoing experience during binocular rivalry.


Materials and Methods


Participants

One hundred and fifty healthy, right-handed, native English speakers, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no history of psychiatric or neurological illness (mean age = 20.19 and 92 were females) participated in the study. All participants had provided their written informed consent approved by the Department of Psychology and York Neuroimaging Centre (YNIC), University of York ethics committees, and were debriefed after completion of the study. Participants were either paid or given course credits for their participation.


Procedures

Participants arrived at YNIC where we acquired brain images including T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), resting state MRI and DTI. On subsequent days, participants took part in a comprehensive set of behavioural assessments that captured different aspects of cognition, including both the experience sampling task and other experimental tasks (including binocular rivalry). These tasks were completed over three sessions on different days, with the order of sessions counterbalanced across participants. The task in which ongoing experience was measured always took place at the beginning of these laboratory sessions.


Experience sampling

We measured patterns of ongoing cognition in a paradigm that manipulated memory load by using alternating blocks of 0-back (low-load) and 1-back (high-load) conditions (see top left panel of), with the initial block counterbalanced across individuals (see Turnbull et al. 2019b for a complete description of this task). Multi-dimensional Experience Sampling (MDES) was used to measure the contents of ongoing thought. On each occasion, participants reported their thoughts by responding to one of the 13 questions presented in. Participants always rated their task focus first, and then described their thoughts at the moment before the probe on a further 12 dimensions. Participants always answered all questions and were probed on an average of 27 occasions during the task over the three sessions of the experiment. The rationale behind our approach is that different patterns of thought can be identified as regularities in covariation with how the questions are answered. These patterns can be quantified by applying statistical techniques, such as principal components analysis (PCA), to the experience sampling data. In this context, the dimensions produced by the application of PCA to MDES data acted as proxies for different thought patterns. Prior studies have shown that the patterns identified in this manner are robust to different samples of participants (Smallwood et al. 2016), consistent across situations (e.g. during scanning and in the behavioural laboratory, Sormaz et al. 2018) and show a degree of correspondence between experiences in the real world and in the laboratory (Ho et al. 2020).


Binocular rivalry

We showed rivalling stimuli to participants for four trials of 120 s in duration and asked them to report their percepts using a computer mouse. The stimulus consisted of oblique gratings (1c/deg, 50% contrast, ±45 deg, 6 deg in diameter, smoothed by a raised cosine envelope) shown to opposite eyes (see bottom left panel of). All stimuli were presented on a gamma-corrected Iiyama VisionMaster Pro 510 cathode-ray tube (CRT) monitor with a mean luminance of 32 cd/m2 and were viewed through a mirror stereoscope to permit presentation of different images to the left and right eyes. The stimuli were surrounded by a dark ring and a binocular Voronoi texture to promote binocular vergence and fusion (Baker and Graf 2009). Participants held down one mouse button when they perceived a particular percept (e.g. a left-oblique grating) and the other when they perceived the alternative (e.g. a right-oblique grating). If they simultaneously perceived both percepts, or experienced a mixed percept, they held down both buttons. This allows our paradigm to reveal the duration of time in which one percept dominated the other, as well as situations when both images were perceived at the same time. We counterbalanced the orientations of the rivalling stimuli between the eyes on alternate trials.


Diffusion tensor imaging

The DTI scan lasted 13 min. A single-shot pulsed gradient spin-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence was used with the following parameters: b = 1000 s/mm2, 45 directions, 7 T2-weighted EPI baseline scans, 59 slices, FOV = 192 × 192 mm2, TR = 15 s, TE = 86 ms (minimum full), voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm3, matrix = 96 × 96. DTI data preprocessing steps involved eddy-current distortion correction and motion correction using FMRIB's Diffusion Toolbox (FDT) v3.0, part of FMRIB Software Library (FSL) (Smith et al. 2004). FA was calculated by fitting a tensor model at each voxel of the preprocessed DTI data and the resulting images were brain-extracted using Brain Extraction Tool (BET) (Smith 2002). Voxelwise FA maps were analysed using tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) (Smith et al. 2006). After participants’ FA data were non-linearly aligned to FMRIB58_FA standard space, they were transformed to the mean space of these subjects and then affine transformed to the 1-mm MNI152 space. Next, the mean of all FA image was created and thinned to create a mean FA skeleton representing the centres of all tracts common to the group.

The skeletonized FA images were then fed into voxelwise statistics, using FSL's randomize command (a non-parametric permutation inference tool). Using a generalized linear model (GLM), the measured FA values across the skeleton were regressed with the experience sampling results, while age and gender were included as nuisance covariates. T-statistic maps for contrasts of interest were calculated with 5000 permutations (Nichols and Holmes 2002). Resulting maps were thresholded at a family-wise error (FWE) corrected P-value of 0.05 using threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) (Smith and Nichols 2009).

Probabilistic diffusion models were also fitted using Bayesian Estimation of Diffusion Parameters Obtained using Sampling Techniques (BEDPOSTX) (Behrens et al. 2003), with 2 fibres modelled per voxel for 1000 iterations. Probabilistic tractography was performed using probabilistic tracking with crossing fibres (ProbTrackX) (Behrens et al. 2007) to reconstruct fibres passing through the region of interest (ROI) resulted from the above GLM analysis if high degree of cross fibres existed (see Associations with white matter fibre organization section). Tractography was performed in native diffusion space by transforming the ROI as seed masks from standard space into diffusion space using the inverse of the non-linear registration calculated in the TBSS pipeline. We used standard parameters (5000 samples/voxel, curvature threshold 0.2, step length 0.5 mm, samples terminated after 2000 steps or when they reached the surface as defined by a 40% probabilistic whole-brain white-matter mask). Connectivity maps of each individual were thresholded at 1% of total samples, mapped to standard space using non-linear registration and concatenated into a single 4D file.


Results


Categorizing experience


Binocular rivalry

Two metrics were calculated using data from the bistable perception session. The first was the mean duration (in seconds) of each period where one stimulus continuously dominated experience (dominance duration). Mean dominance duration shows robust and stable individual differences (Pettigrew and Miller 1998), which have previously been shown to be associated with connectivity between regions of parietal cortex (Baker et al. 2015), as well as the concentration of inhibitory neurotransmitters (gamma-aminobutyric acid, GABA) in visual regions of the brain (van Loon et al. 2013). Dominance durations are also affected by various personality types (Antinori et al. 2017a,b) and clinical conditions including autism (Robertson et al. 2013), bipolar disorder (Pettigrew and Miller 1998; Miller et al. 2003) and schizophrenia (Xiao et al. 2018; Ye et al. 2019). The second metric was the time when neither percept dominated experience, and so corresponds to the amount of time that participants reported seeing both percepts (mixed). Mixed percepts occur at transitions between states of full dominance, and involve a network of frontal and parietal brain areas, particularly in the right hemisphere (Knapen et al. 2011). Measures of these metrics were then transformed into z-scores, with outliers (>2.5, and based on visualization of boxplot generated in SPSS 25) being replaced with mean values (number of outliers: ‘dominance duration’ = 23, ‘mixed’ = 11). We found no correlations on the scores of these two metrics (r = 0.02, P < 0.9).


Experience sampling

In our analysis, we used the decomposition reported by Sormaz et al. (2018, see original paper for complete details). In brief, PCA was applied to MDES data at the trial level as standardized in our other works (e.g. see Smallwood et al. 2016; Konishi et al. 2017). This produced four components: (i) ‘Detail’, reflecting patterns of detailed visual task-related experience, (ii) ‘Off-task thought’, dissociating on-task thoughts from episodic self-relevant thoughts, (iii) ‘Modality’, distinguishing thoughts related to images or words and (iv) ‘Emotion’ describing the affective tone of experiences. These components are presented in the form of word clouds in the right hand panel of.


Associations with white matter fibre organization

Our first analysis examined associations between white matter connectivity and patterns of ongoing thought identified using MDES data. We conducted a multiple regression in which individual participant's skeleton wide FA map was the dependent variable. Individual’s scores for each of the experiential dimensions identified through PCA were explanatory variables. Age and gender were included as nuisance covariates. Significant negative associations between FA and detailed thoughts were identified, and regions showing this relationship are presented in red in.

Next, we examined the relationship between the current result and those from our prior study (Karapanagiotidis et al. 2017). In Karapanagiotidis et al. (which used a different set of participants), we identified a set of right-lateralized tracts with greater FA for individuals reporting more mental time travel. Comparison of the two FWE-corrected maps indicated an area of overlap (see bottom right panel in). Karapanagiotidis et al. found higher FA linked to experiences characterized by self-generated thoughts about the past and the future, while the current results highlighted lower FA was linked to more detailed assessments of the here and now. Together, these results provide converging evidence that right-lateralized white matter tracts are important for differences in internal versus external focus of attention. As this region of overlap has a high degree of crossing fibres, we used ProbTrackX to estimate the white matter bundles to which this was most likely to be related (see Materials and Methods section, bottom left panel of). It can be seen that the results of this process highlighted multiple large fibre bundles including the inferior occipital-frontal (IFOF) and the cortico-spinal tract (CST), and the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF).


Associations between different features of conscious experience

Having documented associations between white matter structures and ongoing thoughts, we next examined (i) whether patterns of ongoing experience identified by MDES are related to the nature of experience as determined via binocular rivalry, and, if so, (ii) whether these relationships are linked with the associated white matter architectural differences in brain structure. shows the zero-order relationships across this set of variables.

To formally understand the relationship between different patterns of thought, their observed associations with white matter architecture, and the estimates of experience provided by binocular rivalry, we conducted a multivariate analysis of co-variance. In this analysis, mean dominance duration and the proportion of mixed percepts were the dependent variables. The explanatory variables were individual scores on each PCA dimension, as well as the DTI correlate of detailed experience (i.e. the mean FA for the white matter region that is correlated with 'Detail' experience). Age and gender were included as nuisance covariates. We modelled the main effect of each explanatory variable, as well as the interaction between ‘Detail’ and its white matter correlate. We found a significant interaction between ‘Detail’ and its association with white matter connectivity [F(2, 140) = 4.8, P = 0.011, partial eta squared = 0.06], reflecting differences in mean dominance duration [F(1, 149) = 7.43, P = 0.007, partial eta squared = 0.05]. To visualize this association, we plotted the relationship between FA separately for individuals with high and low 'Detail' experience (using median split). It can be seen that the shortest dominance durations were observed among individuals with high levels of 'Detail' and the lowest FA (see left hand panel of). Notably we did not find any association between off-task thought and binocular rivalry, nor with white matter architecture suggesting a relatively specific relationship with highly detailed externally focused experience.


Discussion

Our study set out to better understand the neural basis of different types of shift in the quality of conscious experience by leveraging on methods of experience sampling, binocular rivalry and structural brain imaging. We found a correlation between individual differences in estimates of the integrity of cortical white matter in the right hemisphere and the level of detail with which external events were experienced. Notably, the pattern of right-lateralized white matter tracts that had greater integrity for less detailed experiences in the current analyses overlapped with our prior analysis using a different sample. Our prior study highlighted greater FA for individuals with a greater focus away from the moment to other times and places (Karapanagiotidis et al. 2017). Given that external focus is reduced during periods of self-generated imaginative thought (Kam et al. 2011; Kam and Handy 2013), these two results help establish the importance of a right-lateralized network of white matter tracts in determining aspects of cognition as assessed by experience sampling.

We found an interaction between the measure of detailed experience and its associated white matter correlate with patterns of dominance reported during bistable perception. In particular, individuals who reported higher levels of external details during sustained attention and had the lowest estimates of white matter integrity in these right-lateralized regions, also reported shorter periods when one percept dominated. It is usually assumed that, during binocular rivalry, top-down processes stabilize one potential interpretation of visual input, and so shorter time during rivalry is related to bottom-up influences on perception. Based on our data, our participants’ reports of detailed experience during sustained attention might emerge because of a conscious emphasis on bottom-up influences derived from sensory input that is, in turn, partly constrained by the white matter architecture of the cortex.

In this context, it is interesting to note that our prior studies found that neural signals within the DMN (traditionally assumed to be linked to internal states) encode patterns of detailed thoughts in a working memory task (Sormaz et al. 2018), while Turnbull et al. (2019b) found—in the same cohort as we report here—that, at rest, greater functional connectivity between the DMN and with visual cortex predicted more detailed experiences in the laboratory. Our recent work on the macrostructural organization of the cortex suggests that the DMN is functionally and spatially isolated from sensory and motor systems (Margulies et al. 2016). Prior studies suggest that the DMN can lead to a greater focus on external information with greater detail (Sormaz et al. 2018; Turnbull et al. 2019a,b), or, during efficient task performance (e.g. Esterman et al. 2013; Kucyi et al. 2016; Vatansever et al. 2017a). Perhaps, therefore, these examples (Esterman et al. 2013; Kucyi et al. 2016; Sormaz et al. 2018; Vatansever et al. 2018; Turnbull et al. 2019a,b) reflect situations when there is a particularly strong representation of bottom-up sensory signals within the DMN. Intriguingly, recent retinotopic mapping studies have identified that regions of the DMN can show patterns of selective deactivation as a function of the location of a visual stimulus (Szinte et al. 2019).


Limitations and future directions

Although our study suggests a relationship between detailed processing of external information, the white matter architecture of the cortex and patterns of dominance during rivalry, there are a number of important limitations that should be borne in mind when considering these results. First, based on our data, it seems possible that fluctuations in the degree of task-relevant attention during binocular rivalry will impact upon the nature of how external information can dominate at a given moment in time. Our data cannot address this issue directly because we did not measure experience during the binocular rivalry session. It will be important in the future to measure the focus of individuals’ experience while they are exposed to rivalrous stimuli to address this possibility. Second, alternative measures of tractography are able to detect non-Gaussian features of FA (Cohen-Adad et al. 2008) and it may be worthwhile using these metrics in future studies examining associations with cognition and the white matter structure of the cortex. Third, it is possible that the measure of rivalry, which depends on the participants’ ability to recognize the switches in their conscious experience, may under-represent the actual number of shifts, particularly for participants who lack meta-awareness of their ongoing thought patterns (Schooler 2002). In future studies, this limitation could be addressed by intermittently probing individuals to determine which percept they were currently consciously attending to.

We close by considering the possibility that the fibre bundles identified through probabilistic tractography in our study may offer a possible window into how the DMN can contribute to modes of operation that have both internal and external features. An emerging puzzle in cognitive neuroscience is the role that the DMN plays in cognition. Initial views of this system suggested that it was linked primarily to internal states of ongoing experience that were broadly unrelated to external task performance (e.g. Fox et al. 2005). However, evidence implicating this system in external tasks (Esterman et al. 2013; Smallwood et al. 2013; Konishi et al. 2015; Vatansever et al. 2015, 2017b; Murphy et al. 2018) coupled with our prior demonstrations of a role of the DMN in patterns of detailed thought (Smallwood et al. 2016; Sormaz et al. 2018; Turnbull et al. 2019a,b) challenge the views of this large-scale system as important for purely internal thoughts. Our study identified a white matter region linked to patterns of detailed external thought that was at the overlap of three major white matter fibre bundles. The CST, which originates in regions of sensory and motor cortex with most axons crossing at the anatomical midline between brainstem and spinal cord, is the principal motor pathway for voluntary behaviour and is important for the modulation of sensory information (Kolb and Whishaw 2009; Welniarz et al. 2017). The SLF is a major white matter pathway that connects the frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital lobes (Kawamura and Naito 1984; Petrides and Pandya 1984; Makris et al. 2004; Bernal and Altman 2010); although it has often been associated with playing a key role in language function, together with the arcuate fasciculus, its precise functional role remains disputed (Wang et al. 2016). For example, it is now recognized to make a contribution to broader functions of working memory and cognitive control (e.g. Vestergaard et al. 2011; Chaddock-Heyman et al. 2013). The IFOF is important for connecting the superior frontal and parietal cortices (Hau et al. 2016). It is impossible to determine precisely which of these tracts has the most important link with experience because of limitations of the ability of DTI to distinguish crossing fibres (Jbabdi et al. 2010); however, emerging evidence suggests that these three tracts may be reasonable candidates for future studies to explore. For example, recent works have suggested that the microstructural architecture of the SLF is predictive of patterns of unpleasant brooding in depression and functional connectivity of a precuneal network within the broader DMN (Pisner et al. 2019), as well as the perception and experience of emotions (Ho et al. 2016). Similarly, Bonnelle et al. (2012) found that traumatic brain injury to a white matter path identified by probabilistic analysis led to less efficient regulation of neural activity within the DMN by the saliency network. Notably, we recently demonstrated that the saliency network plays a critical role in the adaptive allocation of conscious attention to both internal and external foci, in part through its relationship to both the DMN and to systems important for external attention, namely the dorsal attention network (Turnbull et al. 2019a). In future, it would be useful to explore how the structural architecture of the brain constrains the functional activity in the cortex and, in particular, the DMN, across situations varying in their reliance on internal and external modes of cognition.


Conclusions

Prior studies have implicated the DMN in task-relevant material, in particular, in experiences with an emphasis on detailed representations of task-relevant information. The current study combined experience sampling, measures of white matter architecture and indices of binocular rivalry. We found that a detailed focus on task-relevant information during sustained attention was linked to the integrity of white matter pathways in the right hemisphere. This association was linked to shorter periods of dominance during binocular rivalry. Together these results suggest that detailed representations of external task-relevant information may be associated with conscious emphasis on bottom-up influences derived from sensory input, that is possibly constrained by the white matter architecture of the right hemisphere. Our study highlights the possibility that although the DMN is traditionally assumed to be linked to internal states, it may also be associated with task-relevant information under situations when there are particularly strong representation of bottom-up sensory signals in transmodal cortex.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data are available on request.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Event-related potentials reflect prediction errors and pop-out during comprehension of degraded speech

Leah Banellis, Rodika Sokoliuk, Conor J Wild, Howard Bowman, Damian Cruse — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7585676, CC BY 4.0.

Comprehension of degraded speech requires higher-order expectations informed by prior knowledge. Accurate top-down expectations of incoming degraded speech cause a subjective semantic ‘pop-out’ or conscious breakthrough experience. Indeed, the same stimulus can be perceived as meaningless when no expectations are made in advance. We investigated the event-related potential (ERP) correlates of these top-down expectations, their error signals and the subjective pop-out experience in healthy participants. We manipulated expectations in a word-pair priming degraded (noise-vocoded) speech task and investigated the role of top-down expectation with a between-groups attention manipulation. Consistent with the role of expectations in comprehension, repetition priming significantly enhanced perceptual intelligibility of the noise-vocoded degraded targets for attentive participants. An early ERP was larger for mismatched (i.e. unexpected) targets than matched targets, indicative of an initial error signal not reliant on top-down expectations. Subsequently, a P3a-like ERP was larger to matched targets than mismatched targets only for attending participants—i.e. a pop-out effect—while a later ERP was larger for mismatched targets and did not significantly interact with attention. Rather than relying on complex post hoc interactions between prediction error and precision to explain this apredictive pattern, we consider our data to be consistent with prediction error minimization accounts for early stages of processing followed by Global Neuronal Workspace-like breakthrough and processing in service of task goals.

Keywords: conscious pop-out, prediction error minimization, global neuronal workspace breakthrough


Introduction

Prediction error minimization accounts of perception propose that the brain seeks to minimize the mismatch between incoming sensory information and top-down expectations (Rao and Ballard 1999; Friston 2010). To successfully comprehend speech, a prediction error minimization account argues that the listener must generate a set of expectations at multiple levels of representation to attempt to most accurately explain the auditory input (Paczynski and Kuperberg 2012). Consistent with the role of expectations in speech comprehension, the amplitude of the N400 event-related potential (ERP) in response to the final word of a sentence increases with how unexpected that word is, given the context of the sentence (Kutas et al. 1984; Kutas and Federmeier 2011). The N400 can, therefore, be characterized as an index of the amount of mismatch between a semantic prediction and the incoming stimulus—i.e. a semantic prediction error (Paczynski and Kuperberg 2012; Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2019). Indeed, prediction error minimization accounts of global brain function, such as free energy (Friston 2010), propose that all evoked activity in the brain reflects this mismatch of prediction and stimulus, i.e. the prediction error (Rao and Ballard 1999; Clark 2013).

However, not all ERPs can be characterized parsimoniously within a narrow prediction error framework. For example, highly predictable events in rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) that are associated with a subjective experience of conscious ‘breakthrough’ or ‘pop-out’ also elicit large ERPs from ∼300 ms post-stimulus (i.e. the P300; Donchin and Coles 1988), while unpredictable events in the same stream of stimuli will elicit almost no evoked response (Bowman et al. 2013; Rohaut et al. 2015)—the opposite of what would be predicted if ERPs indexed prediction error only. To account for these apparently apredictive effects, prediction error minimization accounts propose that attention increases the precision of predictions, and that prediction error is subsequently weighted by this precision (Kok et al. 2012). As a result, a range of ERP magnitudes, including late apredictive components such as the P300 in RSVP, can be explained as contributions from independently varying precision and prediction error (see also Heilbron and Chait 2018).

The Global Neuronal Workspace is an alternative theory of neural processing that proposes that such apredictive evoked positivities with onsets ∼300 ms post-stimulus reflect the ignition of a stimulus representation into a frontoparietal network for conscious access—whether that stimulus was or was not expected—while earlier ERPs index preconscious processes, including prediction errors (Dehaene et al. 1998; Sergent et al. 2005). Applying this model to speech comprehension, Rohaut et al. (2015) proposed a two-stage ERP profile, with an initial unconscious semantic prediction error in response to each word (the N400, typically onsetting around 200 ms post-stimulus) and a late positive complex (LPC; in this case onsetting around 600 ms post-stimulus) reflecting the ignition of meaning into conscious access. In support of this proposal, the N400 ERP has been observed in states of relative unawareness such as sleep, coma and vegetative state (or unresponsive wakefulness syndrome) (Kotchoubey et al. 2005; Ibáñez et al. 2006; Rämä et al. 2010; Beukema et al. 2016) while the LPC has only been reported in conscious individuals, or in those who were conscious of and subsequently could report target words (Sergent et al. 2005; van Gaal et al. 2014; Rohaut et al. 2015).

We sought to test the proposal that early ERPs (<300 ms post-stimulus) reflect preconscious prediction error processes and later ERPs (>300 ms post-stimulus) reflect conscious access by investigating the comprehension of speech that has been degraded by noise-vocoding (Shannon et al. 1995). Consistent with the role of expectations in speech comprehension, a noise-vocoded speech stimulus that is entirely unintelligible to a naive listener can be rendered intelligible through priming—e.g. by presenting a non-degraded version of the stimulus (i.e. a matched prime) immediately prior to the degraded stimulus (i.e. the target). When successfully primed in such a word-pair listening task, listeners experience a ‘pop-out’ of the meaning of the degraded speech—i.e. subjective conscious access (Davis et al. 2005)—while an unrelated (or, mismatched) prime will not facilitate comprehension of the subsequent target.

Evidence suggests that successful comprehension of noise-vocoded speech requires attentional effort (Hervais-Adelman et al. 2012) and top-down expectations from frontal lobes (Sohoglu et al. 2012; Wild et al. 2012b). Therefore, we predict that if successful comprehension of degraded speech requires effortful generation of top-down expectations, distracted participants will be unable to use a prime word to generate an expectation of the identity of an upcoming target, and will, therefore, neither exhibit a differential word identity prediction error signal nor any subsequent apredictive evoked response to the target. Conversely, we expect that attentive participants will use the prime to generate top-down expectations of the identity of the degraded stimulus, and will therefore more readily comprehend the target. Consequently, and consistent with a two-stage Global Neuronal Workspace account (Rohaut et al. 2015), we expect attentive participants’ ERPs to exhibit an initial prediction error signal [i.e. larger evoked response to mismatched targets; cf. Sohoglu et al. (2012)] followed by an apredictive ‘pop-out’ effect in which the ERP to the correctly expected and comprehended targets is larger than that to the unexpected and predominantly unintelligible targets.


Materials and Methods


Participants

We recruited participants from the University of Birmingham via advertisement on posters or the online SONA Research Participation Scheme until we had achieved our desired sample size of 48 participants with usable data (24 per group; median age = 20 years, range = 18–33 years). While we did not conduct a formal a priori power analysis, we chose a sample of 24 per group as this is approximately double the size of samples in similar previous studies (e.g. Sohoglu et al. 2012) and allowed us to fully counterbalance stimuli lists across participants (see Procedure section below). Our inclusion criteria were right-handed (from self-report), 18–35 years old, monolingual speakers of British English, with no self-reported epilepsy, dyslexia or uncorrected hearing impairment. We compensated participants with course credit or £10/h of their time. The STEM Research Ethics Board of the University of Birmingham granted ethical approval for this study and written informed consent was completed by all participants. To achieve our final sample, we recruited 77 participants but rejected data from 29 participants due to an error of randomization in the experimental code.


Stimuli

A male first-language British English speaker recorded 288 monosyllabic English nouns taken from previous priming studies in our lab (see https://osf.io/m9ud5/ for the full stimuli list; mean length = 440 ms, range = 264–657ms, sampling rate = 44 100 Hz). First, we randomly assigned the stimuli to one of four equal-sized lists (72 words per group) and manually swapped words across lists until the lists were matched on imageability, frequency (BNC), length in phonemes and length in letters. Frequentist tests (ANOVAs) indicated no evidence that the four lists differed in word frequency [F(3, 284) = 0.233, P = 0.873], imageability [F(3, 231) = 0.779, P = 0.507], length in phonemes [F(3, 284) = 0.217, P = 0.885] or length in letters [F(3, 284) = <0.001, P = 1;], and Bayesian equivalent tests [conducted with JASP Team (n.d.) and Morey and Rouder (n.d.)] revealed strong evidence in favour of the null hypothesis for all variables (all BF10 = <0.05;). From these four matched lists, we created counterbalanced conditions across participants (see Procedure section).

We manipulated the intelligibility of targets through noise-vocoding—originally a form of auditory distortion used to simulate the experience of hearing by the means of a cochlear implant (Shannon et al. 1995) (for scripts see https://github.com/conorwild/matlab-audio-scripts/). Noise-vocoding retains the coarse temporal structure of the speech but reduces spectral clarity and fine temporal detail. The amplitude envelope from (approximately) logarithmically spaced frequency bands is extracted and applied to bandpass-filtered noise of the same frequency band. Finally, the bands of envelope-modulated noise are recombined to create the final noise-vocoded stimulus (Davis et al. 2005). Using this method, we created six-band noise-vocoded versions of each stimulus to be used as the targets, and subsequently normalized each stimulus to its root mean square (RMS; Wild et al. 2012a,b; see Supplementary data for auditory examples of word stimuli).


Procedure

We randomly assigned each participant to be in the attentive or distracted group. All participants simultaneously heard the same auditory stimuli and viewed the same visual stimuli, with some small differences in inter-stimulus intervals between groups to allow for behavioural responses (detailed below). Those in the attentive group paid attention to, and responded to, the auditory stimuli, while those in the distracted group paid attention to, and responded to, the visual stimuli.

In the attentive group, each auditory trial began with the auditory presentation of the prime followed by the target with a stimulus onset asynchrony of 1 s. After 2.2 s, participants were cued by a tone (500 Hz, 200 ms duration) to rate the ‘noisiness’ of the target on a scale of 1 (low) to 5 (high) via keyboard press. Following each rating, the next trial began after an inter-trial interval of between 1 and 2 s, selected randomly from a uniform distribution on every trial.

In the distracted group, participants listened to the same auditory stimuli but did not complete the noisiness judgement task; instead, they made responses to the visual stimuli (see below). Therefore, the timing of the auditory stimuli in the distracted group was identical to the attentive group, with the exception that the time between the onset of each auditory target and the onset of the next auditory trial did not include a waiting period for a behavioural response. Rather, the inter-trial interval was between 1 and 2 s, selected randomly from a uniform distribution on every trial.

While listening to the auditory stimuli, both attentive and distracted groups of participants watched a sequence of rapidly changing visual stimuli. However, only those in the distracted group were instructed to complete a task on the basis of the visual stimuli and to ignore the auditory stimuli. The distraction task was a 1-back visual monitoring task, in which the sequence of visual stimuli was comprised of a series of images of ambiguous black shapes presented on a white background. Each ambiguous image was shown for 200 ms with an 800 ms fixation period between each image. For each participant, the order of images was randomized and the task for those in the distracted group was to press a key every time a repetition occurred (i.e. a 1-back task; 20% of trials). We subsequently calculated task accuracy to ensure that participants in the distracted group were distracted from the auditory stimuli by attending to the visual 1-back task. Participants in the attentive group watched the same visual stimuli, but were instructed to ignore them and to attend to the auditory stimuli only.

Upon completion of the above task, all participants completed a surprise recognition memory test—i.e. they were presented with a subset of previously heard (old) words interspersed with (new) words that they had not heard previously and were required to judge each word’s old/new status. The memory test stimuli were formed of all 144 words from the mismatched condition of the word-pair priming task (i.e. 72 primes and 72 targets), as well as 72 new memory test items. We did not include the matched targets in the memory test as they had been presented twice (as a clear prime and as a degraded target) and therefore cannot be compared to the unrelated targets or primes which had only been presented once. In the memory test, each word was presented visually for 300 ms, with a fixation point present for 2–3 s (selected randomly from a uniform distribution on each trial) between each word. We randomized the order of words for each participant. Participants made an old/new discrimination for each word on a 6-point remember-know scale, made up of the following responses; ‘definitely new, probably new, not sure, probably old, definitely old and remember’ (Ritchey et al. 2015). We reversed the scale and inverted the responses for half of the participants to control for potential effects of response hand and thus remove any motor preparation differences. Note that electroencephalography (EEG) data acquired during the memory task are not analysed here and are beyond the scope of this article. Nevertheless, all data are available in the online repository for analysis by the community (https://osf.io/m9ud5/).

During the experiment, each participant heard all four word lists (see Stimuli section), with each list comprising either the matched words, mismatched primes, mismatched targets or the new memory test items. For each of the 12 possible combinations of word lists for mismatched primes and mismatched targets, we manually ensured that there was no phonological, semantic or associative overlap between the target and the prime. In total, there were 24 possible sets of stimuli to achieve full counterbalancing of lists. Therefore, across all participants, each word was heard an equal number of times in every possible condition.


EEG pre-processing

We recorded EEG with a 128-channel Biosemi ActiveTwo system at a sample rate of 256 Hz, with two additional electrodes recording from the mastoid processes. Offline, we digitally filtered the EEG signal between 0.5 and 40 Hz, segmented the data into epochs from 500 ms before the onset of the prime until 1000 ms after the onset of the target, re-referenced the data to the average of the mastoids, and baseline corrected to the 200-ms pre-prime period. Unless otherwise stated, all offline pre-processing was performed with a combination of the Matlab toolbox EEGLAB (version 14.0.0b; Delorme and Makeig 2004) and custom scripts. Note that all scripts are available online at https://osf.io/m9ud5/

Artefact rejection proceeded in the following steps. First, we used an automated procedure, based on FASTER (Nolan et al. 2010), to identify and remove bad channels. Specifically, bad channels were those with absolute z-scores of >2.5 on any of the following measures: variance of voltage, mean correlations with other channels and Hurst exponent. Across participants, a median of seven channels was discarded (range: 2–14). Second, we used an automated procedure, also based on FASTER (Nolan et al. 2010), to identify and remove trials with non-stationary artefacts. Specifically, a trial was bad if its absolute z-score was >2.5 on any of the following measures: mean range of voltages across channels, mean variance of voltages across channels and the deviation of the trial average voltage from the average voltage across all channels. Third, we conducted independent component analysis of the remaining data (EEGLAB’s runica algorithm) and used the toolbox ADJUST (Mognon et al. 2011) to automatically identify and remove components with the expected spatial and temporal features of blinks, eye-movements and generic discontinuities. Next, we interpolated any previously removed channels back into the data. Finally, trials with artefacts that had not been effectively cleaned by the above procedure were identified with visual inspection and discarded. After these pre-processing steps, a median of 65.5 trials contributed to the match condition (range: 39–71) and a median of 66 trials contributed to the mismatch condition (range: 37–71). Prior to analysis, all data were re-referenced to the average of all channels.

For our subsequent memory ERP contrasts, we only included data from the attentive group as recognition memory was not significantly greater than chance for the distracted group. We also excluded those participants who contributed fewer than 12 trials to either of the two categories [i.e. targets that were subsequently remembered (hits) versus targets that were subsequently forgotten (misses)] and those whose recognition memory was not greater than zero, resulting in a subgroup of 13 participants (hits: median 21, range 13–36; misses: median 26, range 12–49).


EEG/MRI co-registration

The electrode locations of each participant were recorded relative to the surface of the head with a Polhemus Fastrak device using the Brainstorm Digitize application (Brainstorm v. 3.4; Tadel et al. 2011) running in Matlab (Mathworks). Furthermore, on a separate day, we acquired a T1-weighted anatomical scan of the head (nose included) of each participant with a 1 mm resolution using a 3T Philips Achieva MRI scanner (32 channel head coil). This T1-weighted anatomical scan was then co-registered with the digitized electrode locations using Fieldtrip (Oostenveld et al. 2011).


Sensor analyses: ERPs

Prior to analysis, we calculated participant-wise average ERPs for each condition separately using the robust averaging method of SPM12 (default params) that iteratively down-weights outlier voltages across trials. As recommended in the SPM12 documentation, the subsequent average ERPs were then low-pass filtered at 20 Hz (i.e. a second low-pass filter after the 40 Hz pre-processing filter), and baseline corrected to the 200 ms prior to the onset of the target.

Time window selection for the ERP analyses proceeded in two stages, and in a similar way to (Sohoglu et al. 2012). First, we calculated the global field power (GFP) (Skrandies 1990) of the grand average of all trials (i.e. both conditions together) to identify time windows of interest. GFP is the root mean square of average-referenced voltages and is a principled means of identifying component peak latencies from an orthogonal contrast (Skrandies 1990). We then identified a time window around each peak by inspecting the global dissimilarity (Skrandies 1990)—the mean of the root mean square of voltage differences between consecutive time points, after the data have been scaled by the GFP. Deflections in the time course of global dissimilarity therefore suggest boundaries between scalp topographies. On this basis, we selected the following ERP topographies: 137–207, 211–246, 250–371, 375–547, 551–648 and 652–707 ms.

To minimize the number of comparisons in post-target time windows, we only investigated the main effects of target type (i.e. matched versus mismatched, averaged across attention group) and attention (i.e. attention versus distraction, averaged across target type) when an interaction contrast produced no significant clusters (i.e. the difference between matched targets and mismatched targets between attention groups). Where a significant interaction cluster was observed, we tested for simple effects with paired samples t-tests of data averaged within the electrodes that contributed to the interaction cluster. Furthermore, within each significant interaction and main effect cluster, we investigated subsequent memory effects (hits versus misses) with paired samples t-tests of data averaged within the electrodes that contribute to each cluster.

ERPs (or difference ERPs between two within-subject conditions) within each time window of interest were compared with the cluster mass method of the open-source Matlab toolbox FieldTrip (version 20160619, Oostenveld et al. 2011). First, for each participant × condition, we averaged the voltages at each electrode within the time window of interest. Next, a two-tailed t-test (dependent samples for interaction and main effect of target type; independent samples for main effect of attention) between conditions was conducted at each electrode. Spatially adjacent t-values with P-values passing the threshold (alpha = 0.05) were then clustered based on their spatial proximity. Clusters were required to involve at least four neighbouring electrodes, with an electrode’s neighbourhood defined as all electrodes within ∼4 cm on a template head (median number of neighbours: 11; range: 2–16). A second non-parametric step corrects for multiple comparisons by conducting 1000 Monte Carlo randomizations of the above method (shuffling condition labels) to estimate the probability of the observed cluster under the null hypothesis (Maris and Oostenveld 2007). We applied a cluster alpha threshold of 0.025 as we were testing for both positive and negative effects.


Sensor analyses: Bayesian tests

When the above sensor analyses failed to find support for an interaction between target type and attention (i.e. the difference of differences) but did find evidence of a main effect, we used Bayesian equivalent t-tests to test the sensor data for evidence in support of the null hypothesis. Specifically, at each electrode, we calculated a Jeffrey–Zellner–Siow Bayes factor (JZS-BF), implemented with an open-access script (https://github.com/anne-urai/Tools/tree/master/stats/BayesFactors). A JZS-BF between 1 and 3 is considered to be weak/anecdotal evidence in support of the hypothesis being tested; from 3 to 10 is substantial evidence; and 10 to 100 is strong evidence (Jeffreys 1961). Note that, as the Bayes Factor is the ratio of evidence for two hypotheses, the same category descriptions hold for the inverse (i.e. 1/3, 1/10, 1/100). While this approach does not take into account spatial clustering, as in the sensor analyses above, it does allow us to qualitatively inspect the spatial distribution of evidence in support of the null hypothesis across the head.


Source estimation

We performed source estimation using EEG data and individual electrode locations from 48 participants. The analyses were completed using subject-specific T1-weighted anatomical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans for 39 participants and template T1-weighted MRI images (provided by the Matlab toolbox FieldTrip) for the remaining nine participants due to issues with T1 data collection and image quality.

From the subject-specific T1-weighted anatomical scans, individual boundary element head models (four layers) were constructed using the ‘dipoli’ method of the Matlab toolbox FieldTrip (Oostenveld et al. 2011). Individual electrode locations were aligned to the surface of the scalp layer extracted from the segmented T1-weighted anatomical scans using fiducial points and head shape as reference points. The alignment of electrodes and scalp surface was further visually inspected to detect potential deviations and, where necessary, small manual corrections were applied.

As we required single-trial data to estimate the sources of the ERP effects, we used the pre-processed sensor-level data prior to the robust averaging step described above. We defined trials as time windows from −500 to 1900 ms relative to the prime, and baseline corrected the EEG data using the time window (−200 to 0 ms) relative to target presentation (i.e. the same time window as for the sensor analyses). Before the direct statistical comparison, we balanced the number of trials between conditions by randomly removing trials from the condition (discarded trials: median = 2, range = 0–13) with more data until both datasets had the same number of trials (median = 130, range = 74–136).

Our source estimation followed the analysis approach described in Popov et al. (2018). Therefore, the data was first filtered between 1 and 40 Hz, using a first filter as implemented in the ft_preprocessing function of Fieldtrip (using default parameters). Additionally, to mitigate the confounding influence of correlated activity in the auditory cortices (i.e. from binaural stimulation) on linearly constrained minimum variance (LCMV) beamformer source analysis, we calculated the surface Laplacian of the data and leadfields as in Murzin et al. (2013). Thus, the scalp current density of the data was calculated and the covariance matrix was estimated using a time window from −500 to 1900 ms. A common spatial filter (including trials of both conditions) was computed using an LCMV beamformer (inputting the surface Laplacian transformed leadfield) (Van Drongelen et al. 1996; Van Veen et al. 1997; Robinson and Vrba 1999). Specific beamformer parameters were chosen based on the approach used by Popov et al. (2018) including a fixed dipole orientation, a weighted normalization (to reduce the centre of head bias), as well as a regularization parameter of 5% to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. This common spatial filter was then used for source estimation. The dipole moments of both conditions were extracted in the post-stimulus time windows that showed significant clusters at the sensor level (time window 1: 137–207 ms; time window 2: 211–246 ms; time window 3: 250–371 ms; time window 4: 551–648 ms), and their absolute values were averaged over time points to obtain one average value per grid point (virtual electrode) and time window of interest. For clear visualization of the foci of our source estimates, we calculated t-tests at each virtual electrode and thresholded the subsequent t-images at P < 0.05 [see and Sokoliuk et al. (2019), for further validation of the method].


Results


Speech intelligibility

Attentive participants rated the mismatched targets as noisier (median = 4, range 1–5) than the matched targets (median = 3, range 1–4), despite the stimuli being physically distorted to the same level. This difference was significant in a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test (W = 232, P < 0.001).


Recognition memory: discrimination (dʹ)

To quantify participants’ ability to discriminate between old and new items in the memory test, we calculated their discrimination score (dʹ). dʹ was calculated as the z-transformed proportion of hits (i.e. ‘old’ responses to old items) minus the z-transformed proportion of false alarms (i.e. ‘old’ responses to new items; Haatveit et al. 2010). The proportion of hits and false alarms was transformed using the inverse of the standard normal cumulative distribution. All ‘probably old’, ‘definitely old’ and ‘remember’ responses to old items were considered a hit, while the same responses to new items were considered false alarms.

A two-way mixed ANOVA with factors of word type (clear prime; degraded target; both only heard once by each participant) and attention (attentive; distracted) revealed significant main effects of word type [F(1, 46) = 30.243, P = ≤ 0.001, partial n2 = 0.397] and attention [F(1, 46) = 8.714, P = 0.005, partial n2 = 0.159], and a non-significant interaction [F(1, 46) = 0.528, P = 0.471, partial n2 = 0.011]. A Bayesian equivalent mixed ANOVA revealed considerable evidence for a model containing main effects of both word type and attention (BF = 69 083 relative to a null model), which itself was 2.687 times more likely given the data than a model containing both main effects and an interaction term. These results reflect the participants’ more accurate memory for clear primes than degraded targets and the higher memory accuracy in the attentive group than the distracted group (see for all inferential statistics).

One-sample T-tests determined that dʹ for both clear primes and degraded targets were significantly different from zero (i.e. above chance) for attentive participants [clear: mean dʹ= 0.457, SD = 0.309, t(23) = 7.245, P ≤ 0.001; degraded: mean dʹ = 0.194, SD = 0.218, t(23) = 4.368, P ≤ 0.001], while memory for either item type was not significantly different from zero for distracted participants [clear: mean = 0.132, SD = 0.515, t(23) = 1.251, P = 0.223; degraded: mean = −0.070, SD = 0.393, t(23) = −0.869, P = 0.394], suggesting that the distraction task effectively suppressed processing of the auditory stimuli. Bayesian equivalent T-tests indicated considerable evidence for better than chance memory for attentive participants (clear: BF10 = 71 004; degraded: BF10 = 131), and anecdotal evidence for chance-level memory performance for distracted participants (clear: BF10 = 0.430; degraded: BF10 = 0.302).


Recognition memory: Recollection and Familiarity

To estimate the level of processing that the clear and degraded words received, we calculated separate measures of Recollection (i.e. explicit contextualized memory of the event) and Familiarity (i.e. memory without context) from the recognition memory judgements for each participant (Atkinson and Juola 1974; Yonelinas et al. 1997). Specifically, Recollection scores were calculated by: (Rold – Rnew)/(1 – Rnew), with Rold reflecting the proportion of old items given a Remember response by the participant, and Rnew reflecting the proportion of new items given a Remember response. Familiarity was calculated by: [Fold/(1 − Rold)] − [Fnew/(1 − Fnew)], with Fold reflecting the proportion of old items given a ‘definitely old’ or ‘probably old’ response by the participant, and Fnew reflecting the same responses to new items (Ritchey et al. 2015).

Two two-way mixed ANOVAs with factors of word type (clear prime; degraded target; both only heard once by each participant) and attention (attentive; distracted) revealed significant main effects of word type on both Recollection and Familiarity estimates [F(1, 46) = 13.287, P ≤ 0.001, partial n2 = 0.224, and F(1, 46) = 14.533, P ≤ 0.001, partial n2 = 0.240, respectively], reflecting higher scores for clear primes than for degraded targets. No other main effect or interaction was significant (all Ps > 0.127). Bayesian equivalent ANOVAs similarly concluded that there was strong evidence for models containing a main effect of word type for both Recollection (BF10 = 43.703, BFinclusion = 60.743) and Familiarity (BF10 = 64.090, BFinclusion = 42.913).

One-sample t-tests identified significantly different from zero measures of Recollection for clear primes [t(23) = 6.127, P ≤ 0.001, BF10 = 6538.041] and degraded targets [t(23) = 2.499, P = 0.020, BF10 = 2.720] in the attentive group, while Familiarity was not different from zero [clear: t(23) = −0.009, P = 0.993, BF10 = 0.215; degraded: t(23) = −1.899, P = 0.070, BF10 = 0.998]. In the distracted group, neither Recollection nor Familiarity were significantly different from zero for either word type [Recollection clear: t(23) = 0.245, P = 0.809, BF10 = 0.221; Recollection degraded: t(23) = −1.003, P = 0.326, BF10 = 0.337; Familiarity clear: t(23) = −1.452, P = 0.160, BF10 = 0.542; Familiarity degraded: t(23) = −2.042, P = 0.053, BF10 = 1.247].


Event-related potentials


Interaction effects

We observed an interaction between target type and attention in the 250–371 ms time window post-target only (cluster P = 0.011) with estimated generators in right middle temporal gyrus and right fusiform gyrus. Follow-up simple effects tests indicated greater positivity within this cluster for matched targets relative to mismatched targets during auditory attention only [t(23) = 2.755, P = 0.011, two-tailed, BF10 = 4.376;. While the mean voltages in this time window exhibited the opposite pattern in the distracted group—i.e. greater positivity to mismatched targets—this difference did not pass our significance threshold [t(23) = −1.869, P = 0.074, two-tailed; and a Bayesian equivalent analysis found only anecdotal evidence in favour of the null hypothesis in this contrast (BF10 = 0.955). A subsequent memory contrast within this cluster indicated greater positivity for mismatched targets that were subsequently remembered (hits) relative to mismatched targets that were subsequently forgotten (misses) in the attentive group, although this effect was only weakly significant in a t-test [t(12) = 2.185, P = 0.049, two-tailed; and a Bayesian equivalent indicated that the evidence was only anecdotal (BF10 = 1.628). No clusters were formed in any other time window for the interaction contrast. We therefore examined the main effects below.


Main effects

We observed a dipolar main effect of attention in the 137–207 ms time window, with greater frontal positivity (cluster P = 0.009) and greater posterior negativity (cluster P = 0.010) for attentive participants relative to distracted participants. Our source analyses estimated this effect to be generated primarily within right superior frontal lobe, overlapping with right premotor cortex. A subsequent memory contrast within each cluster indicated significantly larger ERPs for subsequent hits relative to subsequent misses in the attentive group, with the Bayes factor in the frontal cluster indicating substantial evidence for a subsequent memory effect [positive frontal cluster: t(12) = 2.657, P = 0.021, BF10 = 3.195; negative posterior cluster: t(12) = −2.320, P = 0.039, BF10 = 1.963].

We also observed a dipolar main effect of target type in the 211–246 ms time window with a larger left frontocentral positivity to mismatched targets than to matched targets (cluster P = 0.023) and a larger right temporal negativity to mismatched targets than to matched targets (cluster P = 0.013). Source analyses estimated this effect to be primarily generated within left supramarginal gyrus and right insula. Both Frequentist and Bayesian t-tests indicated no compelling evidence of subsequent memory effects in the attentive group in either cluster [positive cluster: t(12) = −1.764, P = 0.103, BF10 = 0.939; negative cluster: t(12) = 1.964, P = 0.073, BF10 = 1.210].

In the same time window (211–246 ms), we also observed a main effect of attention, with greater frontal positivity (cluster P = 0.002) and greater posterior negativity (cluster P = 0.004) in the attentive group relative to the distracted group, with estimated generator in right visual cortex. As with the effect of target in this time window, both Frequentist and Bayesian t-tests agreed that there is no evidence of subsequent memory effects in either cluster [positive cluster: t(12) = 1.557, P = 0.145, BF10 = 0.734; negative cluster: t(12) = −1.443, P = 0.175, BF10 = 0.647].

In the 551–648 ms time window, we observed an effect of target type, with a larger centroparietal negativity to mismatched targets than matched targets (cluster P = 0.019) estimated to be generated in the right posterior superior temporal gyrus. The subsequent memory contrast in this cluster failed to reach our significance threshold, and the Bayesian equivalent similarly concluded only anecdotal evidence in favour of the hypothesis [t(12) = 2.158, P = 0.052, BF10 = 1.568].

The main effect of target in the 137–207 and 652–707 ms time windows did not pass our significance threshold (P = 0.048 and 0.042, respectively; alpha = 0.025). The main effect of attention in the 375–547 ms, and 652–707 ms time windows also did not pass our significance threshold (P = 0.047 and 0.082, respectively; alpha = 0.025). No clusters were formed in any other contrast or time window.


Discussion

Consistent with our hypothesis and previous research, repetition priming enhanced the perceptual intelligibility of the degraded targets (Davis et al. 2005; Hervais-Adelman et al. 2012; Wild et al. 2012b; Sohoglu et al. 2014). This result is, independently, evidence for the importance of prior knowledge (or expectation) for generating a conscious experience of comprehending degraded speech—i.e. a ‘pop-out’. Furthermore, consistent with a proposed two-stage ERP profile of auditory processing (Rohaut et al. 2015), we observe two dissociable ERP effects.

First, and contrary to some arguments of attentional enhancement of prediction errors (Auksztulewicz and Friston 2015), we observe an early predictive signal (211–246 ms)—i.e. larger for unpredicted words than for predicted words—that does not significantly interact with attention. Indeed, the results of our Bayesian analysis of this effect indicate considerable evidence for the absence of interaction with attention. Specifically, 96% of electrodes provided greater evidence for the null hypothesis of no interaction between target type and attention in this time window (i.e. BF < 1), 48% of which provided substantial evidence for the null (i.e. BF < ⅓). Within a two-stage model of auditory processing, this effect may be analogous to the mismatch negativity, which has a similar time course and can be elicited by rare stimuli without attention or conscious awareness (Heilbron and Chait 2018). However, we had not expected to find evidence for differential processing of matched and mismatched targets during inattention—a result that is seemingly inconsistent with prior evidence that successful comprehension of degraded speech requires top-down expectations (e.g. Wild et al. 2012b). Indeed, inattentive participants should have been unable to form top-down expectations that would subsequently elicit a prediction error. One parsimonious interpretation is that the distraction task did not sufficiently direct attention away from the speech stimuli, thus allowing those participants the opportunity to also generate expectations while completing the visual distraction task. However, a Bayesian analysis indicated that our data provide substantial evidence that distracted participants’ memory for the mismatched prime words did not differ from zero. As all prime words were heard as clear speech, we would expect that memory would be above chance here if the participants were not sufficiently distracted. Therefore, we conclude that the early differential processing of targets during inattention is not the result of insufficient inattention.

An alternative interpretation is that the signal reflects the error of a non-conscious expectation that can be generated without top-down influence. For example, previous studies of word-pair priming of noise-vocoded speech have used the written form of the word as the prime stimulus, whereas our prime stimuli were clear (non-degraded) versions of the same speech stimulus. Therefore, it is possible that a low-level prediction that an auditory stimulus will have the same envelope as the just-heard auditory stimulus, e.g. could be generated inattentively. Indeed, prediction error minimization accounts posit that expectations are generated at multiple levels of the processing hierarchy. Consequently, while a conscious top-down expectation may not be generated by an inattentive participant, an expectation from a lower level of the hierarchy may nevertheless be instantiated and compared with the sensory input—e.g. an expectation that the auditory environment will remain stable, as is one interpretation of the mismatch negativity during inattention (Sussman and Winkler 2001). Indeed, our source analyses estimate generators of this effect primarily within right temporal lobe and left supramarginal gyrus, while a similar previous study involving visual primes (rather than auditory primes as in this study) reported an effect with a similar time course to be generated within the more canonically semantic regions of left middle and inferior frontal gyri (Sohoglu et al. 2012). We therefore suggest that this effect is a non-semantic error signal, while similar studies that involve visual primes and auditory targets may be more likely to promote semantic expectations. Indeed, the estimated right temporal lobe generator of our error effect is also linked to domain-general processing of complex auditory stimuli, rather than to specific linguistic and semantic processing (McGettigan and Scott 2012).

As hypothesized, we also observe a later component that is largest for degraded words that ‘pop-out’ into awareness. Specifically, from ∼250 to 350 ms post-stimulus the ERPs are larger for matched targets than mismatched targets in the attentive group only. Indeed, in that same time window, the ERPs in the distracted group exhibited a similar distribution to the preceding error signal. The apredictive nature of this ERP component is seemingly at odds with prediction error accounts of evoked potentials. However, the concept of precision is often used to explain such patterns (Kok et al. 2012). Specifically, the error signal is considered to be weighted by the system’s confidence in that signal—its precision. Attention is one mechanism that is thought to increase precision (Hohwy 2012). Therefore, one could argue that while a fulfilled prediction about an upcoming word elicits little prediction error, an individual’s attention to the word increases precision which multiplicatively leads to a larger precision-weighted prediction error signal (i.e. an evoked potential) than an unpredicted but unattended stimulus. Indeed, the effect of attention to boost the magnitude of evoked potentials is evident in the two main effects of attention we observe prior to this effect (137–207 and 211–246 ms;). However, it is clear that any observed form of interaction (i.e. predictive or apredictive) can be explained by appealing to the multiplication of two hidden and independently varying signals (namely, error and precision), thus creating issues in rigorously studying the role of precision weighting in perception (cf. Heilbron and Chait 2018). Nevertheless, under a precision-weighted prediction error interpretation, some argue that all evoked potentials should interact with attention (e.g. Heilbron and Chait 2018), which is demonstrably not the case for our earlier main effect of target (211–246 ms;) unless one appeals to complex post hoc interactions of precision and error. Nevertheless, a pivotal challenge for the influence of precision weighting on prediction error signals would come from evidence of entirely independent influences of prediction and attention on evoked potential amplitudes.

Under a Global Neuronal Workspace interpretation, this later component could be considered to reflect the breakthrough of a stimulus representation into conscious experience (Alsufyani et al. 2019). While we did observe weak evidence of recollection of mismatched targets (P = 0.020; BF10 = 2.720), indicating that mismatched targets were not entirely unintelligible perhaps due to a degree of perceptual learning across the experiment (Hervais-Adelman et al. 2008), attentive participants’ ratings of intelligibility (noisiness) were entirely consistent with the pop-out of meaning following matched primes (Davis et al. 2005). Furthermore, this component was larger for subsequently remembered items than for subsequently forgotten items, albeit weakly (P = 0.049; BF10 = 1.628). The link to subsequent successful recognition provides further evidence to link this ERP component with a conscious experience on the part of the listener. However, this effect is earlier than we predicted based on a typical two-stage profile and its scalp distribution is more reminiscent of a P3a than the P3b or other late positive components typically linked to global-workspace breakthrough effects. Nevertheless, P3a-like components have been observed in breakthrough contexts (Bowman et al. 2013) and Global Neuronal Workspace theory broadly posits that scalp positivities, as observed here, reflect the ignition of a representation into conscious access (Dehaene and Christen 2011). Source estimates of other late positivities within this framework typically involve generators distributed across the cortex, consistent with a brain-wide ignition into conscious access (e.g. Bekinschtein et al. 2009). However, while the source estimate of our observed pop-out effect includes some weak evidence of generators distributed across lobes and hemispheres, the focus is estimated to be in the right middle temporal gyrus and right fusiform gyrus. Interestingly, the late positivity described by Rohaut et al. (2015), and linked to the stage of conscious access of meaning within the two-stage profile, was also estimated to be generated within right fusiform gyrus, as well as left dorsolateral frontal cortex. Furthermore, there is evidence for greater activity within the right fusiform gyrus when the meaning of speech is task-relevant (von Kriegstein et al. 2003). We conclude therefore that our ERP positivity reflects conscious access of the meaning of speech. While we cannot rule out the potential role of task-related post-perceptual processing rather than conscious access itself (Aru et al. 2012), we argue that the majority of evidence for components linked to such processes occur later in time than the pop-out effect observed here (i.e. after ∼350ms; e.g. Pitts et al. 2014; Schelonka et al. 2017).

In a later time window, from ∼550 to 650 ms, we also observed more extreme ERPs for mismatched targets than for matched targets that did not interact with attention. At first glance, it is unclear why post-breakthrough processing should differ according to the relative match of expectations. The scalp distribution of this effect is markedly similar to that reported in an overlapping time window of 450 to 700 ms post-target by Sohoglu et al. (2012; see in that paper) who also found that magnetoencephalography (MEG) sensor data in the same time window significantly predicted trial-by-trial ratings of speech clarity, such that reduced neural responses to matched targets were accompanied by increased experiences of speech clarity. Our source estimates indicated a primarily right posterior superior temporal generator for this effect, while Sohoglu et al. (2012), with more sensitive MEG source analyses, report right temporal generators alongside bilateral inferior frontal and middle occipital gyri. Sohoglu et al. (2012), therefore, conclude that this effect reflects the neural processes that generate the experience of speech clarity. On that basis, we would expect this effect to interact with attention in this study. However, we find no evidence for this interaction. Nevertheless, while Bayes equivalent t-tests at each electrode in this time window indicated substantial evidence for no interaction in the majority of electrodes, two electrodes did exhibit substantial evidence for an interaction (i.e. BF10 > 3). As our cluster forming threshold required four neighbouring electrodes, it is possible that this effect does indeed interact with attention, but to an extent that is not evident with our specific analysis choices. If that were the case then, these later effects may indeed reflect processes associated with the conscious experience of meaning, or may reflect consequent processes such as those in service of task demands—i.e. providing a judgement of the noisiness of the stimulus (Aru et al. 2012). Indeed, one might expect that, if evoked potentials reflect breakthrough into awareness, as we have argued, subsequent post-breakthrough potentials would reflect cognitive operations upon that percept, such as response selection or meta-cognition. This would favour a three-stage account of evoked potentials—(i) an early prediction error processing stage, (ii) a subsequent breakthrough into awareness and (iii) a consequent stage of cognitive operations in support of task goals. These stages are reminiscent of characterizations of neural correlates of consciousness into the prerequisites and consequences of conscious perception, as well as the perceptual experience itself (Aru et al. 2012). However, given our lack of strong evidence either for or against an interaction with attention, the functional significance of our 551–648 ms effect remains a target for future investigation.

One potential formulation of the way in which we might expect prior knowledge and attention to interact is for greater precision to lead to accelerated processing, and therefore earlier ERP latencies. Variable latencies across conditions may thus create spurious amplitude differences due to temporal smearing. Following the suggestion of an anonymous reviewer, we tested the interactive effects of expectation and attention on the latencies of each of our identified components. Crucially, our analyses provided evidence in favour of the hypothesis that component latencies did not interact between expectation and attention (all BFinclusion between 0.252 and 0.523;), thus indicating that our observed amplitude differences are unlikely to be driven by differential effects of precision/expectation latency. Nevertheless, more advanced multivariate analyses across multiple levels of speech degradation may further delineate the ERP correlates of precision-weighted prediction error from those of putative breakthrough effects (see Blank and Davis 2016).


Conclusions

Our results indicate a link between the conscious experience of semantic pop-out in comprehension of degraded speech and a positive-going ERP in the range of 300 ms post-stimulus—consistent with a Global Neuronal Workspace framework. Prior to this positivity, ERPs appear to reflect the error of non-semantic predictions, consistent with prediction error minimization accounts. To consider our observed late positivity within the same prediction error account requires a post hoc appeal to freely varying precision weighting that is not straightforwardly verified. We therefore suggest that our data are consistent with early negative-going ERPs as reflections of prediction error while later positive-going ERPs reflect conscious access and processes in support of task demands (e.g. Dehaene and Christen 2011; Rohaut et al. 2015).


Contributor Information

Leah Banellis, School of Psychology and Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK.

Rodika Sokoliuk, School of Psychology and Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK.

Conor J Wild, Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada.

Howard Bowman, School of Psychology and Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK; School of Computing, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NF, UK.

Damian Cruse, School of Psychology and Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

All data and scripts are available at https://osf.io/pckyv/


Defending subjective inflation: an inference to the best explanation

J D Knotts, Matthias Michel, Brian Odegaard — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7734437, CC BY 4.0.

In a recent opinion piece, Abid (2019) criticizes the hypothesis that subjective inflation may partly account for apparent phenomenological richness across the visual field and outside the focus of attention. In response, we address three main issues. First, we maintain that inflation should be interpreted as an intraperceptual—and not post-perceptual—phenomenon. Second, we describe how inflation may differ from filling-in. Finally, we contend that, in general, there is sufficient evidence to tip the scales toward intraperceptual interpretations of visibility and confidence judgments.

Keywords: consciousness, richness of visual experience, subjective inflation, perceptual confidence, filling-in, signal detection theory


The Central Issues for Inflation, and Re-Appealing to Inference to the Best Explanation

We previously argued that the debate about whether visual phenomenology is rich or sparse (Lamme 2003, Kouider et al. 2010; Block 2011; Phillips 2018; Ward 2018) may benefit from considering a psychological phenomenon referred to as subjective inflation (Knotts et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018). Briefly, subjective inflation describes the finding that human observers exhibit liberal detection biases and overconfidence in their peripheral and/or unattended visual field, despite matched objective task performance for central and/or attended stimuli (Rahnev et al. 2011; Solovey et al. 2015; Li et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018). We suggested that these findings may help explain the apparent richness we experience across the entire visual field, despite known physiological and behavioral deficits in the unattended periphery.

In a recent article, Abid (2019) points out that it is ambiguous whether the psychophysical findings supporting inflation are genuinely perceptual (or intraperceptual) as opposed to cognitive (or post-perceptual) in nature (Phillips 2011; Witt et al. 2015). While the inflation interpretation assumes that these effects are intraperceptual, Abid provides alternative post-perceptual interpretations, which he implies should be at least as compelling as their intraperceptual counterparts. Given these ambiguities, he suggests that we ought to remain agnostic about whether inflation effects have anything to do with phenomenology.

Abid also suggests that inflation posits an unfounded connection between decisional processes and phenomenology. According to him, this problem is orthogonal (3) to the problem of determining whether inflation is an intraperceptual or post-perceptual phenomenon. However, shortly after calling the two issues orthogonal, he shows that the former ultimately boils down to the latter:

If … there is some additional argument or evidence to be given in favor of the claim that there is a decisional component to perception, then it ought to be spelled out explicitly … Although the notion of a perceptual decision does play a central role in signal detection theory, the notion is ambiguous between a detection or discrimination process that is intraperceptual and one that is post-perceptual. (4)

Accordingly, despite his emphasis that the decisional issue is precisely what is under dispute (5; see also his article’s title), his arguments focus primarily on the issue of intra- vs. post-perceptual ambiguity. Therefore, we focus on this issue here, which, we agree with Abid, is critical for inflation.

Since neither the intra- nor post-perceptual interpretation of a given behavioral effect can be directly decided by empirical evidence at the moment (Block 2007; Phillips 2011), we approach this debate about inflation effects as we have previously (Knotts et al. 2018), in the context of inference to the best explanation (Harman 1965; Block 2007). Specifically, we consider (i) whether there is sufficient evidence to tip the scales toward either the intra- or post-perceptual interpretation of relevant signal detection theory (SDT) criterion shifts, (ii) whether, assuming that these criterion effects are intraperceptual, inflation is different from filling-in, and (iii) whether there is sufficient evidence to tip the scales toward either the intra- or post-perceptual interpretation of visibility or confidence judgments.


Are Inflation Effects Measured by c Intra- or Post-Perceptual?

Evidence supporting inflation includes the finding that observers tend to make higher numbers of false alarms in unattended or peripheral conditions in detection tasks that employ performance matching (Rahnev et al. 2011; Solovey et al. 2015). In SDT, this increase in false alarms manifests in the estimate of the perceptual criterion (c) used to distinguish signal from noise (Green and Swets 1966; Macmillan and Douglas Creelman 2004). While changes in c are associated with many perceptual illusions, such as the Müller-Lyer (Commons et al. 1991; Witt et al. 2015), sound-induced flash (Shams et al. 2000; Rosenthal et al. 2009), and stream/bounce (Grove et al. 2012) illusions, Witt et al. (2015) have argued that such changes cannot distinguish intraperceptual from post-perceptual biases. This distinction is critical for the inflation hypothesis in that intraperceptual biases are assumed to reflect changes in phenomenology, whereas post-perceptual biases are not.

One piece of evidence previously cited in favor of the intraperceptual interpretation of criterion effects is resistance to trial-by-trial feedback (Rosenthal et al. 2009; Rahnev et al. 2011; Solovey et al. 2015). The general intuition here is that if a bias is truly intraperceptual, there is no amount of explicit information to the contrary that can cause one to unsee it. In this sense, trial-by-trial feedback resistance is a sign of cognitive impenetrability, which is itself a criterion for determining whether a phenomenon is perceptual or post-perceptual (Pylyshyn 1999; Firestone and Scholl 2016). The Müller-Lyer illusion, which affects the criterion measure c, provides a good example (Witt et al. 2015). Even if one understands that a line with outward tails tends to appear longer than a nearby line of equal length with inward tails and modifies their responses accordingly, this knowledge and behavior do not eliminate the experience of the illusion (Brosvic and Finizio 1995).

In response, Abid argues that trial-by-trial feedback resistance is not necessarily evidence for the intraperceptual interpretation because post-perceptual biases could also resist trial-by-trial feedback. This point is well taken. Perhaps we can benefit from inference to the best explanation. What might a post-perceptual feedback-resistant bias look like? And, does it seem more or less plausible than the intraperceptual alternative?

Abid provides examples; he cites racist, religious, and superstitious biases (3) as being putatively both post-perceptual and feedback resistant. However, do we expect such high-level, social, and spiritual biases to show up in the types of controlled, low-level psychophysics experiments supporting the inflation hypothesis? We believe it is reasonable to assume that the answer to this question is no. One of the virtues of psychophysics is that we do not have to worry about such personal-level biases. If there are better, lower-level examples of post-perceptual feedback-resistant biases, Abid does not provide them. Thus, on this example alone, we argue that inference to the best explanation should point at least marginally toward the intraperceptual interpretation.

Debates on how to separate intra- and post-perceptual effects are not new. For instance, multisensory research has engaged similar issues: when perceptual reports for one sensory modality are modified by sensory input in another, is it due to post-perceptual bias, or a true change in phenomenology (Choe et al. 1975)? The field has largely settled on the intraperceptual interpretation by (i) trusting that subjective reports index phenomenology (Bertelson and Radeau 1976), (ii) demonstrating feedback resistance (Rosenthal et al. 2009), and (iii) anatomical evidence supporting multimodal interactions in early levels of the sensory hierarchy (Kayser et al. 2005, Ghazanfar and Schroeder 2006; Murray et al. 2016). We have made the case for the first two criteria in inflation.

Regarding the third criterion, while much work on the neural basis of inflation remains to be done, several sources of evidence indicate that criterion effects—such as those observed in inflation—can be intraperceptual. For instance, Jin and Glickfeld (2019) have used optogenetic manipulation of the excitability of V1 to change early sensory encoding in a detection task and induce liberal (or conservative) criteria without changing sensitivity (d′). As another example, high-prestimulus neural excitability—indexed by α and β power—can induce a liberal bias in detection tasks, as well as higher visibility and confidence ratings, while leaving sensitivity in discrimination tasks unchanged (Benwell et al. 2017; Samaha et al. 2017, 2020b). A study by Iemi and Busch (2018), which leverages opposing interpretations of criterion bias in two-interval forced choice detection and discrimination tasks, respectively, suggests that these prestimulus excitability effects on the criterion are intraperceptual. And further studies have indicated that these effects likely operate by modulating sensory evidence accumulation in the visual cortex (Kloosterman et al. 2019; Samaha et al. 2020a,b).

Finally, expectation-based detection and discrimination biases—such as those we have argued for with respect to inflation (Knotts et al. 2018)—are associated with processing in early visual cortex (Kok et al. 2013; Mostert et al. 2015; Pajani et al. 2015) and in areas as low level as the superior colliculus (Crapse et al. 2018). While the neural locus of inflation need not necessarily be constrained to early sensory regions, these findings provide additional evidence that the biases underlying inflation could be intraperceptual in nature.


If the Relevant Changes in c Are Intraperceptual, Is Inflation Distinct from Filling-In?

Another criticism from Abid is the following: if the relevant changes in c are intraperceptual, then inflation is not distinct from the phenomenon of perceptual filling-in (Komatsu 2006). However, if these changes in c are post-perceptual, then inflation is irrelevant for phenomenology. Regardless of which option is correct, inflation fails to contribute anything meaningful to the debate.

Reiterating the operational definition of inflation may help clarify what it contributes to the debate about phenomenology. Inflation occurs when there is a difference in subjective ratings between two conditions for which objective performance is matched. On this definition alone, inflation is, at least in theory, distinct from filling-in; one can imagine there being filled-in perceptual content for which subjective judgments are not inflated. And one can imagine there being inflated subjective judgments that are not based on filled-in perceptual content. However, giving Abid the benefit of the doubt, we might hypothesize that these two phenomena always co-occur, rendering them, in practice, indistinct. If this is true, then wherever filling-in is observed, inflated subjective judgments should be observed as well.

Some preliminary evidence for filled-in representations being subjectively inflated comes from an elegant study by Ehinger et al. (2017), in which participants were more likely to choose a filled-in striped pattern than a veridical one when forced to indicate which of the two patterns was continuously striped. Similar evidence has been found for filled-in foveal content under low light conditions (Gloriani and Schütz 2019), but it remains an open question whether inflated subjective judgments are an intrinsic feature of filling-in, or, rather, if inflation is an independent, dissociable process. The same question can be asked of the potential relationship between subjective inflation and other peripheral mechanisms that involve summary statistics (Cohen et al. 2016). For example, are subjective ratings for crowded stimuli inherently inflated, as has been observed in at least one case (Odegaard et al. 2018)?

These questions are empirically tractable and should be investigated in future studies. But, regardless of whether inflation is ultimately an inherent feature of other known peripheral summary mechanisms or an independent, dissociable process, what is important is that it provides explanatory power for a fundamental question about the apparent richness of phenomenology: why, if peripheral vision is coarse and summarized, does it not feel coarse and summarized? It feels so because subjective evaluation of these coarse and summarized representations is systematically biased, or inflated, relative to what we would predict based on the relationship between objective and subjective judgments in typical, foveal vision. This empirically tractable operationalization is the novel evidence aimed at explaining the apparent richness of visual phenomenology (Abid 2019, 4) that the inflation hypothesis offers.

While operational definitions are useful for understanding inflation from a behavioral standpoint, we agree with Abid that more precisely characterizing what it is like to have inflated phenomenology, and how it may differ from what it is like to experience filled-in content, is essential. The phenomenological difference between modal and amodal completions may provide a helpful analogy. Modal completion involves the subjective visual perception of filled-in contours and surfaces. For example, one can clearly see filled-in, illusory contours between the Pac-Men-like shapes at each corner of a Kanizsa square. In modal completion, completion operates by a form of filling-in that has modal features (e.g. visual features). In amodal completion, on the other hand, the completed parts are not subjectively visualized—which is why it is amodal—but are still visually represented, giving rise to a visual sense of presence of occluded figures (Michotte and Burke 1951; van Lier and Gerbino 2015; Thielen et al. 2019).

Importantly, evidence suggests that amodal completion is at least partly a perceptual process: it can be cognitively impenetrable (Kanizsa 1985; Ekroll et al. 2016); it occurs relatively early on in visual processing (Sekuler and Palmer 1992; Murray et al. 2001; Chen et al. 2009); occluded objects pop out as do their unoccluded counterparts in visual search (Rensink and Enns 1998); and amodally completed objects can induce adaptation effects that are similar to those induced by their unoccluded counterparts (Weisstein et al. 1972; Fang and He 2005).

Although amodal completion and subjective inflation probably depend on different neurocognitive mechanisms, we suggest that, at the phenomenological level, perceptual inflation may feel somewhat like amodal completion. Both phenomena involve a perceptual sense of presence that is distinct from active filling-in, or conscious perception of qualitatively visual features, such as colors. In that sense, one can phenomenologically characterize subjective inflation in the visual periphery as a feeling of presence of visual features, similar to the feeling of presence elicited by looking at the square in, or the sausage horse in. In much the same way that amodal completion is thought to be a perceptual phenomenon and is different from modal completion, we hold that subjective inflation is a perceptual phenomenon, distinct from filling-in.

Of course, this does not mean that filling-in does not contribute to the overall sense of phenomenal richness. Presumably, the two processes would be complementary (e.g. as we have described for the studies by Gloriani and Schütz 2019; Ehinger et al. 2017). Furthermore, the distinction between modal and amodal completion does not, in and of itself, provide support for the idea that filling-in and inflation are, in practice, dissociable processes. As mentioned above, it may be that filled-in representations always display the operational signature of inflation. The analogy to modal and amodal completion is simply intended to provide a more intuitive sense of how the two processes could differ in terms of their respective contributions to phenomenology.


Are Subjective Judgments Intra- or Post-Perceptual?

Abid’s last major criticism of inflation regards the validity of subjective judgments as measures of phenomenology. His primary challenge is that sources of information other than introspection about visual phenomenology may contaminate subjective judgments. This is analogous to his argument about post-perceptual interpretations of SDT criterion shifts. For example, regarding confidence judgments, he states that A student deep in the thick of Cartesian skepticism may lack confidence in all their perceptual judgments, but it would be preposterous to claim that reading Descartes might render one visually impaired (4).

We agree and suggest that precisely what makes such a claim—which amounts to an odd type of Orwellian postdiction (Phillips 2011)—preposterous is that Abid is describing a different type of confidence judgment than what is typically asked for in perceptual tasks. One amounts to an abstract, philosophical position, while the other is a simple metacognitive judgment of task performance. If a Cartesian skeptic with a normally functioning visual system repeatedly rates zero confidence in their performance on a task that they are performing significantly above chance, then the simplest explanation is that they are failing to comply with task instructions. But we do not need to worry about such cases as long as we do our due diligence as experimenters and provide clear instructions. If, on the other hand, Abid suggests that study participants should not be trusted to follow task instructions in general, then his argument overgeneralizes to psychological research as a whole.

Abid provides other examples of a similar flavor. For instance, he suggests that the overconfidence observed in crowding (Odegaard et al. 2018) may be due to participants knowledge that they can often discriminate objects surrounded by other objects in non-laboratory settings: they simply need to move their eyes and fixate them. While we cannot definitively rule out this possibility, is it the best explanation of the observed phenomenon? This interpretation fails to acknowledge that overconfidence was observed for crowded stimuli relative to non-crowded stimuli. Why would the knowledge that eye movements can improve perceptual inference apply more to the crowded condition? Again, Abid offers a tenable but uncompelling example of a post-perceptual bias that could contaminate an intended measure of phenomenology. Inference to the best explanation again favors the simpler interpretation that participant’s confidence judgments meaningfully reflect what they see.

While Abid explicitly targets studies using visibility (Rahnev et al. 2011) and confidence ratings (Odegaard et al. 2018) cited as evidence in support of subjective inflation, his arguments generalize to all studies that use confidence and visibility judgments as measures of phenomenology, by groups on all sides of many key debates in consciousness science (e.g. Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Landman et al. 2003; Ramsøy and Overgaard 2004; King and Dehaene 2014; Bronfman et al. 2014; Maniscalco and Lau 2016; Webb et al. 2016; Ward et al. 2016; Matthews et al. 2018). Ultimately, any result in the psychology of perception relying on any kind of reports can be re-interpreted as post-perceptual, provided that one is willing to assume the existence of sufficiently complex post-perceptual biases. However, it would be incorrect to conclude, for instance, that visibility judgments never tell us anything about phenomenology simply because alternative post-perceptual explanations of these judgments are conceivable, or because those judgments can sometimes be dissociated from phenomenology. To avoid this overgeneralization, we suggest that subjective judgments should be considered meaningful indicators of phenomenology until proven guilty of post-perceptual influences.

But this is not to say that subjective measures are simply better than nothing. In addition to their face validity for assessing phenomenology, recent work explains the utility and relevance of using confidence ratings in paradigms where performance is matched to probe conscious awareness of phenomenological content (Morales et al. 2019), and at least some perceptual findings using confidence and visibility judgments cannot be accounted for by post-decisional cognitive/memory biases (Samaha and Denison 2020). Researchers can also analyze visibility and confidence judgments within the framework of SDT (Maniscalco and Lau 2012; Galvin et al. 2003), which offers rigorous tools for quantifying the effects of biases in experimental settings. This type of empirical rigor stands in contrast to recent appeals to use open-ended picture drawing and verbal descriptions to probe phenomenology (Haun et al. 2017). While such approaches are not necessarily without merit, they are just as susceptible to post-perceptual re-interpretation, while lacking the benefits of fitting within a quantitative framework. Thus, if the goal is to have a true science of conscious awareness that involves testable predictions and quantifiable measures, confidence and visibility judgments currently represent our best option, as evidenced by their pervasive use in consciousness research. Of course, this is not to say that they represent a perfect, linear index of phenomenology, as we have acknowledged previously (Knotts et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018; Michel 2019).


Conclusion and Future Directions

Overall, we appreciate Abid’s appeal to skepticism given the current limits on what we can unequivocally infer about consciousness from empirical investigation (Block 2007; Phillips 2011). However, we agree with Block (2007) that given this difficulty, progress in our understanding of consciousness hinges critically on inference to the best explanation. In this regard, we have argued that shifts in both the SDT criterion and subjective judgments that have been cited as evidence for subjective inflation (Knotts et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018) are best explained as being intraperceptual. We have also attempted to clarify, by way of analogy to amodal completion, the putative qualitative nature of inflated phenomenology.

There are still many questions about inflation that need answering. For example, why does inflation occur? Despite Abid’s puzzling claim to the contrary (Abid 2019, 6), we have already written on this issue (Knotts et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018), suggesting that it may be linked to self-consistent perception (Stocker and Simoncelli 2007; Luu and Stocker 2016), or could be due to reliance on priors (Kouider and Dupoux 2004; Kouider et al. 2007) and/or summary representations (Cohen et al. 2016) when information is sparse. However, arguments can only take this debate so far in the near future. What we need is more data to test whether or not this phenomenon extends beyond what has been shown thus far, including the degree to which it does (or does not) extend across different perceptual domains, the degree to which it is (or is not) supported by paradigms requiring different degrees of decisional complexity (detection vs. discrimination vs. identification; Odegaard and Lau 2016), the degree to which it does (or does not) operationally dissociate from filling-in, and the degree to which it may be compatible (or not) with contemporary ideas and theories about why we have phenomenology at all (Gershman 2019; Lau 2019). The full explanatory power of inflation can be explored in tests that we have outlined previously (Knotts et al. 2018; Odegaard et al. 2018), and we look forward to seeing whether this idea can continue to provide insight regarding a historically difficult scientific problem.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

There are no specific data to make available with this article.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Neural network models for DMT-induced visual hallucinations

Michael M Schartner, Christopher Timmermann — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7734438, CC BY 4.0.

The regulatory role of the serotonergic system on conscious perception can be investigated perturbatorily with psychedelic drugs such as N,N-Dimethyltryptamine. There is increasing evidence that the serotonergic system gates prior (endogenous) and sensory (exogenous) information in the construction of a conscious experience. Using two generative deep neural networks as examples, we discuss how such models have the potential to be, firstly, an important medium to illustrate phenomenological visual effects of psychedelics—besides paintings, verbal reports and psychometric testing—and, secondly, their utility to conceptualize biological mechanisms of gating the influence of exogenous and endogenous information on visual perception.


Introduction

The framework of predictive coding states that the human brain generates a model of the world by constantly combining prior beliefs with sensory information (Friston 2018). The resulting model is partially consciously perceived and subject to report. Each experience depends on a balanced weighting of prior and sensory information, a balance that can be disturbed by classical psychedelics which act primarily via the serotonergic system (Jacobs and Trulson 1979). Inspired by the usage of deep convolutional neural networks to model psychedelic hallucinations (Mordvintsev et al. 2015; Suzuki et al. 2017) and increasing evidence on the role of the serotonergic system in gating sensory information (Azimi et al. 2020), we suggest two recent generative deep convolutional neural network architectures to illustrate the perturbation of the balanced integration of sensory and prior information associated with visual perception.

We exemplify a psychedelic perturbation via N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), a hallucinogen known for inducing some of the most vivid and unique forms of visual imagery (i.e. hallucinations) known to science, which can be reliably elicited during eyes-closed conditions (Szara 1956; Strassman et al. 1994). Descriptions of DMT-induced changes in conscious perception can be found in answers to systematic questionnaires (Timmermann et al. 2018a), phenomenological research (Shanon 2002a, b), anecdotal evidence (Erowid Center erowid’s Experience Vaults) and paintings featured in ‘visionary art’ (Grey 1990; Luna and Amaringo 1999). The striking changes in visual perception caused by DMT (commonly described as ‘immersive’ forms of visual imagery), the short duration of effects (5–20 min) and the low health risk qualify this substance as a well-controlled perturbational tool for the study of conscious perception (Timmermann et al. 2019). Although it is known that DMT’s psychedelic effects result from the molecule binding to various serotonin receptor types, as confirmed behaviourally in both humans (Valle et al. 2016) and mice (Keiser et al. 2009), it remains an open question how the molecule perturbs the balanced integration of sensory and prior information in conscious perception.

Deep convolutional neural network architectures are being used as generative models to produce increasingly realistic images, showing e.g. faces, bedrooms or cars that do not actually exist but look deceivingly real (Karras et al. 2019). The underlying convolutional network architecture can be seen as a detailed model of the visual processing system in the mammalian brain, as has been shown by matching specific network layers with brain regions in monkeys (Rajalingham et al. 2018) and humans (Grossman et al. 2019). We present the output of two deep convolutional neural network architectures resulting in visual features reminiscent of descriptions of psychedelic-induced visual imagery. Firstly, using a generative model designed to produce realistic images of human faces (Karras et al. 2019), we show the impact of perturbing the noise input of the model and discuss a potential biological interpretation for the omission of noise. Noise is usually added to all levels of the model to produce most realistic output and its omission results in a painterly, smooth version of the generated images, in line with descriptions of imagery reported by people under the influence of DMT. Importantly, this generative model illustrates further how sparse latent information about visual scenes may result in rich conscious experiences, using the ventral visual system in the mammalian brain as a ‘canvas’ for perception or imagination (Pearson 2019). Secondly, we discuss a convolutional network for style transfer – i.e. changing a given ‘content’ image to resemble, in style only, a ‘style’ image (Gatys et al. 2016) – which results in images consistent with visual depictions of beings (or ‘entities’) featured in DMT-induced forms of ‘visionary art’ (Grey 1990; Luna and Amaringo 1999). The influence of style onto a given content image can be regulated with a parameter when training the model, which one might explore as a DMT-dose-dependent visual distortion.

The proposed model interpretations are speculative examples intended to illustrate the potential of generative deep neural networks to create visual output in line with psychedelic phenomenology. Such models not only have the potential utility of being a most accurate medium to illustrate visual effects of psychedelics but also to conceptualize potential biological mechanisms of the balanced integration of exogenous and endogenous information into conscious experience.


NVIDIA’s Face Generator with Noise Perturbations as a Model for DMT’s Effect

NVIDIA’s generative model (Karras et al. 2019) consists of an 18-layer feed-forward convolutional neural network, fine-tuned with adversarial network techniques to generate highly realistic images of human faces. Adversarial training of a generative model consists of two networks, a generator and a ‘critic’. The generator network synthesizes an image from latent activity and the ‘critic’ evaluates the distance of this image from the distribution of the training set. Both networks can be trained via back-propagation to improve their performance, assessed via metrics such as the Frechet Inception Distance, measuring the distance between feature vectors (i.e. activity in late but not final network layers) of real and generated images (Karras et al. 2017).

The output image of the trained generating network is determined by a ‘content’ vector of 512 numbers that influence the input to each convolution, via an extra non-linear multi-layer network and subsequent affine transformations. Different parts of the content vector determine different classes of features of the portrait image, from coarse ones such as face proportions and expression to fine ones such as skin and hair colour. shows a schematic of the architecture developed by Karras et al. (2019).

Besides the content vector, the generated output image is further influenced by noise that is added directly to each pixel before each convolution. The omission of this noise results in fewer fine-details in the generated image, such as freckles or individual hair, and an overall smoother look, as shown in, when comparing the top left image (weak noise added to all layers, 1–18, designed to create the most realistic images) with the bottom left image (complete omission of noise). The resulting absence of image details, being a ‘cleaned-up’ version of the scene, can be widely found in verbal and artistic depictions of the visual effects induced by DMT. Contents of DMT experiences often either consist of low-level features (e.g. geometrical patterns) alone, or complex scenes composed of simple visual motifs (Grey 1990; Strassman 1996; Shanon 2002b). Noticeably, DMT is known for inducing visual imagery, which is able to compete with (and at high doses completely ‘overlay’ over) visual imagery triggered by the external environment, often resulting in confusing experiences, in particular in eyes-open conditions (Strassman 2001).

Unlike in the decoding step of an autoencoder where latent activity in one layer entirely determines the output, the starting activity of NVIDIA’s generative network is constant and the output image is influenced by style and noise input at each layer. The activity in early layers might be interpreted biologically as activity in the inferotemporal cortex (IT) [a compact representation of a visual scene (Kornblith and Tsao 2017; Grossman et al. 2019) at the final stage of the ventral visual stream], while the output layer may correspond to more primary visual areas early in the ventral stream. That is, the ventral visual system is used top-down for the generation of a consciously perceived image, in line with literature on mental imagery, stating that the visual system is a ‘canvas’ that can either be used by perception or imagination (Pearson 2019). The details of the image depend on the network weights (which we can interpret as endogenous prior information), the input of style in each layer (which can be interpreted either as endogenous, for imagination, or exogenous for perception) and, to a lesser extent, to noise input. That noise input may be interpreted as spontaneous activity in visual areas such as V1, as it was shown that in mice 5-HT2a receptors are involved in ‘powerful scaling of ongoing and evoked components of population activity in V1’ (Azimi et al. 2020), which may thus regulate indirectly the exogenous influence on perception.

This is, however, only one interpretation to illustrate the potential of this generative model in producing visual effects reminiscent of those brought about by DMT by manipulating the noise input, while, at the same time, conceptualizing biological mechanisms. In order to illustrate the range of possible noise manipulations of the model, we further show in, the visual effects of additional noise perturbations, which seem, however, less suitable to model visual effects of DMT. When increasing the noise input amplitude by a factor of 10 (called medium noise in) and adding this noise to all but the last four layers, the output image becomes less realistic and markedly changed in style. Increasing the noise input amplitude by a factor of 40 and adding it only to the first five layers distorts the image dramatically, with the network hardly being able to stabilize on a face at all (strong noise in). There are further weak noise manipulations of this network reported in Karras et al. (2019) with comparably subtle effects on style.


Style-Transfer Network with Style Image as Prior

Creating visual effects that resemble those reported by people under the influence of DMT can further be achieved using style-transfer networks. These architectures take a style image and a content image as input and create a stylized version of the content image. This was originally achieved by Gatys et al. (2016) using a deep convolutional neural network—trained for image classification on a large training set of natural images—and identifying the activation in deeper layers as encoding content while it was found that the inner product of feature maps combined across several intermediate layers (a Gram matrix) produces a scale-invariant representation of the style of an image. Given two images, a content-loss function can be defined for a given layer as the root-mean-square difference in the activation in that layer caused by the two different images, and a style-loss function as a normalized root-mean-square difference in their style-representing Gram matrices. Using back-propagation, this weighted sum of the content-loss function and the style-loss function allows to change pixels in a random image such that it reflects the style of one image and the content of the other.

We used a fast approximation (Johnson et al. 2016; Fast-Neural-Style Pytorch Implementation for Artistic Style Transfer) of the method by Gatys et al. with visually similar results. shows a portrait image (generated with NVIDIA’s face generator) as a content image on the left, stylized using a painting by the artist Udnie, in the middle. The stylized image displays the potential to resemble certain DMT-induced hallucinations, as described in Grey (1990) and Luna and Amaringo (1999).

The general anatomical interpretation of this style-transfer architecture is also the ventral visual stream, with the higher layers corresponding to the IT, proposing that the feedback process is part of creating the perceived image in the brain, in line with the notion that vision is an active process, where both, top-down and bottom-up signals are integrated into a consciously perceived image (Gilbert and Li 2013). The activation in later network layers that encode content may be seen as activity in IT, compactly encoding the content of a scene, while activity in earlier layers encodes details (the style) of the image. The weights of the model are fixed by training on a large set of natural images and the influence of the style has to be set by one scalar before training. That is, a content image is changed according to the style, whose intensity can be set before training. A possible biological interpretation is to see the style as endogenous prior information – encoded in the weights of the network – while the external sensory information – the input image – is kept constant.

Interpreting the content to reflect veridical, exogenous information while the style is endogenous, can be motivated by subjective accounts of DMT experiences. At small or medium doses, reports of DMT-induced perceptual changes with eyes open are often reported as being simple geometric approximations of veridical scenes, more reflecting changes in style rather than content (the actual scene). That is, the ‘broad strokes’ of the perceived scene remain unchanged while the style (amount of detail) is changed. However, phenomenological reports about high doses of eyes-open DMT experiences contain descriptions of perceiving detailed scenes, overlaying on top of the external veridical scene (often called ‘breakthrough’ experience). This would speak in favour of shifts in both endogenous content and endogenous style, similar to dream imagery and eyes-closed imagery associated with DMT administration.

To further illustrate the potential of mimicking DMT-dose-dependent visual distortions, the right-most image in shows the results of a network trained with a very high weighting for style [content-weight set to 1e5 and style-weight to 1e12 using (Fast-Neural-Style Pytorch Implementation for Artistic Style Transfer), resulting in nearly completely overwriting the content of the input image.


Discussion

Using two deep convolutional network architectures, we pointed out the potential to generate changes in natural images that are in line with subjective reports of DMT-induced hallucinations. Unlike human paintings of psychedelic hallucinations—the traditional way to illustrate psychedelic imagery—using well-defined deep network architectures allows to draw parallels to brain mechanisms, in particular with respect to a perturbed balance between sensory information and prior information, mediated by the serotonergic system.

In our first model, NVIDIA’s generative model StyleGAN (Karras et al. 2019), we show how perturbation of the noise input can lead to image distortions reminiscent of verbal reports from controlled experiments in which DMT has been administered (Timmermann et al. 2019). In particular, the omission of noise leads to a smoother, painterly look of the images, illustrating a potential hypothesis that can be conceptualized with such models: as a 5-HT2A receptor agonist, DMT induces a state in which environmental (i.e. exogenous) sensory information is partially blocked—gated by the inserted noise—and system-internal (endogenous) signals are influencing conscious imagery more strongly. Contents of immersive imagery experienced in eyes-closed conditions during DMT administration would thereby correspond to the system’s prior information for the construction of a consciously perceived scene.

Our second model, the style-transfer network architecture, allows us to depict nearly any report of a visual hallucination – assuming one can find a matching content and style image. A possible neural interpretation here is a re-weighing of exogenous and endogenous information caused by DMT, e.g. weakening the sensory information (content image) while increasing the style prior, leading to a simplified depiction of a scene. We hereby add to Google’s ‘deepdream’ results, where a network trained to classify images can be used to backpropagate activation in a certain layer to pixels of a content image (Mordvintsev et al. 2015; Suzuki et al. 2017), showing patterns resembling those drawn by people that experienced psychedelic states, in particular when recurrently back-propagating pixel changes in accordance with a certain activation pattern in deeper layers.

The amount of possible visual scenes that can be generated with this deep style-transfer network is only bound by the number of style and content images one can find. This generality may be seen as an advantage when conceiving deep neural network models as an important medium to illustrate phenomenological effects of psychedelics, besides illustrations and subjective reports. However, more refined psychometric questionnaires and phenomenological methods (Petitmengin 2006) would be needed to tweak model outputs towards most accurate depictions of common visual effects of DMT. This might be initially achieved by asking participants of DMT experiments to select the most appropriate style-transfer output images from galleries such as deepart (Leon Gatys and Bethge). The model’s merit in terms of biological plausibility lies in the adjustable influence of the two components—style and content—that may be mapped to endogenous and exogenous information, respectively, with the adjustment of the perturbation to reflect the DMT-dose.

With both models, we suggest in particular the suppression of exogenous sensory signals following DMT administration, in line with a study showing that activity very early in the visual stream, in retinal neurons, is suppressed by DMT (Heiss et al. 1973). This would appear inconsistent with evidence indicating that psychedelic effects are associated with reductions of top-down and increases in bottom-up signals (Alonso et al. 2015; Timmermann et al. 2018b; Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019; Alamia et al. 2020). This contradiction can be resolved when endogenous activity (i.e. not related to external input) stemming from visual areas is conceptualized as endogenously originating bottom-up activity, as opposed to that of endogenous top-down priors. The importance of primary visual areas for mental imagery without exogenous information has been shown in studies using non-pharmacologically enhanced imagination only (Pearson 2019). This conceptualization is consistent with pervasive reports of perceiving geometrical patterns during psychedelic experiences, which may reflect the anatomical structure of the visual cortex as mathematical modelling suggests [see early phenomenological work on geometrical ‘form constants’ encountered in psychedelic experiences (Klüver 1942) and mathematical modelling of these form constants (Bressloff et al. 2001)]. The reported appreciation of novelty regarding these experiences and apparent absence of connection with participants’ previous forms of semantic knowledge or biographical memories [especially prevalent during DMT experiences (Strassman 2001)] is consistent with the idea that these forms of visual experiences represent an increased influence of endogenous prediction errors (usually considered as bottom-up input), incoming from within the visual system, resulting in the updating of top-down priors. These updated priors possibly account for some of the long-term effects associated with psychedelic experiences on personality, brain function and brain anatomy (MacLean et al. 2011; Bouso et al. 2015; Erritzoe et al. 2018; Barrett et al. 2020).

Research on image encoding in IT suggests that ‘the computational mission of IT face patches is to generate a robust, efficient, and invariant code for faces, which can then be read-out for any behavioural/cognitive purpose downstream’ (Kornblith and Tsao 2017). The latent information entering the NVIDIA generative model may thus be interpreted as activity in IT and the output image as the consciously perceived scene, constructed during the read-out by other cortical areas. How this read-out creates an experience is at the heart of the mind-body problem and we suggest that modelling the effects of DMT on the balance between exogenous and endogenous information may provide experimentally testable hypotheses about this central question of consciousness science. For the example of compact representations of visual scenes in IT, this is especially relevant, since in this brain region the density of 5-HT2A receptors [primarily associated with psychedelic effects, however, not solely (Barker 2018)] is particularly high (Beliveau et al. 2017).

The serotonergic system plays a key role in the balancing between endogenous and exogenous information involved in the construction of conscious experience, as the perturbation by psychedelic molecules such as DMT shows. This balancing is heavily mediated by the interplay between 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors (Nichols 2016; Azimi et al. 2020). Although serotonin receptors can be found across the cortex (Beliveau et al. 2017), specific mechanisms (at different spatial scales) underlie the effects of psychedelics in perception (Nichols 2004). Here we added a cognitive perspective on these systems neuroscience approaches to identify mechanisms of combining endogenous and exogenous information into conscious experience.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Normal observers show no evidence for blindsight in facial emotion perception

Sivananda Rajananda, Jeanette Zhu, Megan A K Peters — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020. PMC7734439, CC BY 4.0.

Some researchers have argued that normal human observers can exhibit “blindsight-like” behavior: the ability to discriminate or identify a stimulus without being aware of it. However, we recently used a bias-free task to show that what looks like blindsight may in fact be an artifact of typical experimental paradigms’ susceptibility to response bias. While those findings challenge previous reports of blindsight in normal observers, they do not rule out the possibility that different stimuli or techniques could still reveal perception without awareness. One intriguing candidate is emotion processing, since processing of emotional stimuli (e.g. fearful/happy faces) has been reported to potentially bypass conscious visual circuits. Here we used the bias-free blindsight paradigm to investigate whether emotion processing might reveal “featural blindsight,” i.e. ability to identify a face’s emotion without introspective access to the task-relevant features that led to the discrimination decision. However, we saw no evidence for emotion processing “featural blindsight”: as before, whenever participants could identify a face’s emotion they displayed introspective access to the task-relevant features, matching predictions of a Bayesian ideal observer. These results add to the growing body of evidence that perceptual discrimination ability without introspective access may not be possible for neurologically intact observers.

Keywords: blindsight, featural blindsight, emotion perception, fear detection, Bayesian ideal observer, metacognition, consciousness


Introduction

The neurological condition of blindsight has fascinated consciousness researchers since its discovery (Weiskrantz, 198; Azzopardi and Cowey 1997); in this rare condition, patients with damage to primary visual cortex can directly discriminate some aspects of visual stimuli but report no conscious visual awareness of them. Thus, to experimentally use this dissociation to isolate conscious awareness of a stimulus from the potential confound of signal processing capacity (Lau, 2008; Morales et al. 2015; Giles et al. 2016; Peters et al. 2017b), we must find a way to induce blindsight-like behavior in neurologically intact observers. Note that, we aim to induce absolute blindsight, where consciousness awareness is abolished completely, as opposed to relative blindsight, where performance is matched while confidence differs (Lau and Passingham 2006; Balsdon and Azzopardi 2015; Peters and Lau 2015; Peters et al. 2017a; Knotts et al., 2018). Successful induction of such “performance without awareness” would pave the way for computational and neuroimaging studies seeking to identify the neural correlates of consciousness (Rees et al. 2002; Block, 2005; Tononi and Koch 2008; Aru et al. 2012).

To measure unconscious perception, researchers have generally been divided on two approaches: those relying on the objective threshold, and those relying on the subjective threshold as the relevant criterion for awareness of a stimulus (c.f. Snodgrass and Shevrin 2006). Objective threshold advocates suggest that performance at chance (d′ = 0) is the threshold at which the subject becomes conscious of the stimulus (i.e. the subject is conscious of the stimulus if d′ > 0). Subjective threshold advocates suggest that the threshold at which a stimulus becomes conscious is the same threshold at which they are able to report it (i.e. only if the subject reports that they saw the stimulus are they conscious of it, meaning d′ > 0 does not necessarily indicate consciousness of the stimulus).

Researchers relying on the subjective threshold definition for stimulus awareness have often attempted to induce blindsight-like behavior in normal observers, typically using visual masking or other similar techniques. Unfortunately, most of these attempts are susceptible to response bias confounds (Eriksen, 1960; Merikle et al. 2001; Ramsøy and Overgaard 2004; Hannula et al. 2005; Charles et al. 2013, Lloyd et al. 2013; Jachs et al. 2015; Peters et al. 2016, 2017a). Further, past attempts to remedy response bias concerns (Kolb and Braun 1995; Kunimoto et al. 2001) have met with their own conceptual or replicability challenges (Morgan et al. 1997; Galvin et al. 2003; Robichaud and Stelmach 2003; Evans and Azzopardi 2007). Recently, we used visual masking in a bias-free paradigm to demonstrate that it may not be possible to induce blindsight in normal observers when response bias confounds are controlled for (Peters and Lau 2015); follow-up studies also demonstrated that several other masking techniques commonly assumed to dissociate objective and subjective processing may similarly fail to produce conditions under which blindsight could be induced (Knotts et al., 2018).

Yet these failures do not unequivocally prove that blindsight-like behavior cannot be induced in normal observers. Although we failed to demonstrate that normal observers can discriminate a stimulus yet be completely unaware of its overall presence (Peters and Lau 2015), it may be possible for an observer to be able to discriminate a stimulus above chance while being unaware of its task-relevant properties. This might occur especially for stimuli that could possibly bypass “conscious” visual processing areas to activate other task-relevant circuitry, such as observations of amygdala reactivity in “unconscious” face emotion processing (Pessoa and Adolphs 2010; Watanabe and Haruno 2015; Diano et al. 2016; Khalid and Ansorge 2017). In such emotion processing “featural blindsight,” the observer would be aware of the face itself and be able to correctly identify its emotion (e.g. happy versus fearful), but would report no subjective or introspective access to the task-relevant features, evinced by no introspective confidence in their choices. Indeed, it has recently been reported that processing of emotional stimuli, especially fearful stimuli, may be a powerful candidate for inducing blindsight-like behavior (Vieira et al. 2017).

Therefore, here we used emotional face stimuli matched on all low-level properties (e.g. luminance, contrast, spatial frequency) to investigate whether normal observers can identify facial emotions without being aware of their ability to do so. Importantly, we controlled for response bias using the same bias-free confidence paradigm (Mamassian 2020) previously shown to demonstrate optimal introspective access using low-level stimuli (i.e. masked Gabor patches) (Peters and Lau 2015). If we observe emotion-processing “featural blindsight” using this paradigm, the results would suggest that the previous failure to demonstrate blindsight in normal observers was due to the unsuitability of impoverished, low-level stimuli to dissociate objective versus subjective thresholds (Peters and Lau 2015)—and further, that emotion processing may provide an ideal candidate for experimentally isolating subjective awareness from objective task performance capacity in future studies seeking the neural or computational correlates of consciousness.


Materials and Methods


Behavioral experiment


Participants

Participants for this experiment were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. The task was launched for 40 people; 33 of these participants completed the experiment. Those who completed the experiment were paid $2. Participants were also incentivized to perform well with an extra $1 which was awarded if they performed better than the previous participant (incentive structure is described under Procedure section). Of the 33 people who completed the experiment, 2 had incomplete data, and 2 had >20% of trials which met the exclusion criteria (see below); data from the remaining 29 participants was included in all further analyses. Informed consent was obtained before the start of the experiment, and all procedures were approved by the University of California, Riverside Institutional Review Board and made in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.


Stimuli

Stimuli consisted of four sets of male and four sets of female faces displaying happiness (“happy” faces), fear (“fearful” faces), or no emotion (“neutral” faces). The faces were selected from the NimStim set of facial expressions (Tottenham et al. 2009), which contains images of 43 (18 male, 25 female) people displaying various emotions and neutral expressions. In an earlier experiment (also via Amazon Mechanical Turk), 20 participants viewed 15 female faces and 13 male faces displaying happiness and fear at maximal intensity, and rated the intensity of the emotion shown by each face on a scale of 0–100, where 0 is “completely neutral” and 100 is the “most possible fear/happiness that a person could exhibit.” We selected the four highest-rated faces from each gender for which the difference in the emotional intensity ratings was not significantly different for “happy” versus “fearful” images.

The selected four male and four female faces were then morphed between the “neutral” image and the “happy” and “fearful” images for each person, to create a set of eight morphs from 0% emotional intensity to 100% emotional intensity for each emotion. We then matched the low-level image properties of the morphs using the SHINE toolbox (Willenbockel et al. 2010): image luminance histograms of the photos were matched through SHINE toolbox's histMatch function with the structural similarity also optimized through structural similarity (SSIM) gradient ascent (20 iterations), and the amplitude spectrum were matched across images through the specMatch function.


Procedure

On each trial, subjects viewed two faces presented sequentially, one after the other. Following the 2-interval forced-choice (2IFC) confidence-betting paradigm (Mamassian 2020) used by Peters and Lau (2015), one interval showed the “neutral” face [Emotion-Absent interval (EA)] and the other showed the same person’s face but with some degree of emotion, selected from the morphed images [Emotion-Present interval (EP)]. The EA and EP intervals were counterbalanced randomly such that the subject would have a 50% of being correct if they bet on either interval. Subjects were asked to determine the emotion of each face (happy/fearful). Subjects were not explicitly informed that one of the intervals had no emotion [which allowed us to compare betting on intervals where there is evidence (EP) versus where there is not (EA)]. Thus, if we find that subjects bet on both EA and EP intervals equally, we can conclude that the metacognitive or introspective confidence—i.e., the awareness of task-relevant stimulus features—for EP intervals is equivalent to that in EA intervals, indicating that subjects had no introspective access to these task-relevant features in the EP intervals. Subjects were also instructed that the two intervals’ emotions were independently chosen, such that any combination of emotion pairs was possible: happy/happy, happy/fearful, fearful/happy, and fearful/fearful. In addition to identifying the emotion, subjects were asked to bet on which emotional identification they felt more confident in. To incentivize their performance, they were told that for each emotion that they identified correctly, they would get a point. They were also told that if they bet on the easier interval, i.e., the one they thought they were more likely to get correct, they would also get a point. These points were then used to determine if they earned the bonus payment.

Each trial began with a fixation point (1000 ms) followed by the first interval’s face presented centrally (size dynamically scaled based on window size to occupy ∼60% of screen height) (500 ms), a second fixation point (1000 ms), and the second interval’s face presented centrally (500 ms). The order of EP and EA intervals was counterbalanced across trials, and the emotion to be presented in the EP interval was chosen pseudorandomly such that 50% of trials presented a fearful face and 50% of trials presented a happy face in the EP interval. Each of the two faces used on each trial was chosen randomly from the eight possible face sets, and both faces within a trial were from different sets. For the EP interval in each trial, the emotional intensity of the face (whether happy or fearful) was pseudorandomly set to be 5%, 15%, or 25% for 32 trials each, or 75% for 16 trials (75% is very easy).

After the second interval’s face had disappeared, subjects indicated which interval they felt more confident in (Interval Question), and then the emotion decision (Emotion Questions) for the first and second face, respectively. To indicate their answers, subjects entered their “emotion” choices using the “H” key (happy) and “F” key (fearful) on their keyboard using their right hand, and their choices about which decision to “bet” on using the “1” and “2” keys using their left hand. The next trial began as soon as subjects had pressed a key or after 6 s had elapsed, whichever happened sooner. As described above, only one of the intervals contained an emotional face, with the other containing a neutral face—despite the fact that subjects were told both intervals contained emotional faces.

Before beginning the main experiment, participants completed four easy practice trials and four hard practice trials. Practice trials were identical to trials in the main experiment, except that the faces presented in both intervals were presented for 1000 ms instead of 500 ms, and both faces had an emotion present to reinforce the instructions given to subjects to judge the emotion in both intervals. Although we could have informed them that only one face contained emotion, we wanted subjects to be equally motivated in both intervals rather than the potential for seeing a clear emotion in the first interval and then not paying attention to the second interval. The emotion intensity in the easy practice trials was 100%, while the emotion intensity in the hard practice trials was 25%. Prior to the beginning of the hard practice trials, participants were told that some emotions would be hard to distinguish, and if they were unsure, they should just make their best guess. After the 8 practice trials, the participants completed 112 trials in the main experiment.

Participants were given two breaks: one after trial 37, and another after trial 74. Each break lasted 1 min, although participants were encouraged to take more time if they needed. In total, the experiment lasted ∼30 min.


Analysis

To determine the objective (Type 1) performance capacity for each participant, we calculated the percent of EP trials in which the emotion was correctly identified separately for each emotional intensity level (Emotion Questions). This produced four “% correct emotion discrimination” values for each subject. Following Peters and Lau (2015), we also calculated the confidence/introspective ability of each observer (Type 2) as the percent of trials the subject “bet” on the EP interval at each of the four emotional intensity levels (Interval Question; “% bet on EP”). Trials were excluded from the “% bet on EP” analysis if reaction times to any question (Emotion or Interval Questions) in the trial exceeded 4000 ms, or if the subject failed to respond to all questions in the trial. Likewise, trials were excluded from the “% correct” analysis if reaction time to the Interval Question or the Emotion Question for the EP interval exceeded 4000 ms, or if the subject failed to respond to either of these questions in the trial. We excluded from further analysis any subjects who retained fewer than 80% valid trials after the two exclusion criteria above were implemented.

To look for emotion processing “featural blindsight,” we follow the definitions introduced by Peters and Lau (2015). If subjects show no emotion processing “featural blindsight,” as soon as they are able to meaningfully identify the emotion in the EP interval (“% correct emotion discrimination” > 50%), they should exhibit some degree of introspective access evinced by an ability to bet on their choices (“% bet on EP interval” > 50%); this behavior would match predictions of a Bayesian ideal observer (Peters and Lau 2015). If, in contrast, subjects do exhibit “featural blindsight,” there will be some level of objective performance capacity (“% correct emotion discrimination” > 50% in the EP interval) at which subjects have no introspective access to their decisional processes, i.e., no ability to meaningfully bet on their choices (“% bet on EP interval” = 50%). To arbitrate between these hypotheses, we compare the goodness of fit of a Bayesian ideal observer computational model to that of a Bayesian observer with additional Type 2 noise, which exhibits featural blindsight. See next sections for details.

During the calculation of d′, whenever the subject exhibited a hit rate or false alarm rate of 0 or 1, we applied a standard correction (Wickens, 2001) to ensure that the calculated d′ would be within a reasonable range (i.e. not infinity). For the hit rate (HR), we corrected the probability using the formulas

where nSignal is the number of emotion present intervals for that emotional intensity. For the false alarm rate (FAR), we corrected the probability using the formulas

where nNoise is the number of emotion present intervals for that emotional intensity.


Computational model

The Bayesian ideal observer computational model has previously been described elsewhere (Peters and Lau 2015). Briefly, for every 2IFC trial, we draw two samples dEP and dEA, each from a bivariate Gaussian distributions SEP and SEA (S ∼ N(μ, Σ)) representing an Emotion-Present face and an Emotion-Absent face, respectively. The mean of the generating distribution for the EP face is μEP = [eHappy, 0] or μEP = [0, eFearful], depending on the random assignment of emotional valence in the EP interval; the mean of the generating distribution for the EA face is always μEA = [0, 0]. Σ = [1 0; 0 1], the identity matrix, for all generating distributions.

In all cases, the true emotional intensity that generated the emotion, i.e., eemotion, is unknown to the observer; the observer only has access to the sample that is being observed. This is why the decision about whether each sample is happy or fearful is made according to Bayes’ rule, marginalizing across all possible emotional intensity levels for both Happy and Fearful emotions:

Confidence in the decision (happy or fearful) for each interval is defined as the posterior probability of the choice that was made, i.e.,

The chosen emotion for each interval, both EP and EA, is defined as the emotion i that maximizes this posterior probability, i.e.,

The model then “bets” on the interval that has the higher posterior probability of the choice, i.e., higher confidence, by comparing the posterior probabilities for the chosen emotion in the EP and EA intervals via a decision variable D,

If D ≥ 0, the model “bets” on the EP interval; if D < 0, the model “bets” on the EA interval.

All simulations of this model’s behavior were done via custom-written scripts in Matlab (Natuck, MA), with emotional intensity level e ranging from 0.01 to 1 in steps of 0.01 and 5000 samples per emotional intensity level.


Simulating emotion processing “featural blindsight”

The ideal observer described above has access to Type 2 information (confidence) with the same degree of fidelity as its access to Type 1 information (emotion decision). In contrast, an observer that exhibits blindsight would have much poorer access to Type 2 information than Type 1 information. Following previous work (Peters and Lau 2015; Maniscalco and Lau 2016), this can be modeled as the addition of increasing amounts of Type 2 noise after the Type 1 decision has been reached. To simulate the behavior of such an observer, we therefore added Gaussian noise to the definition of the Type 2 decision variable D after the Type 1 decision, i.e.,

where ε ∼ N(0, σ). We simulated predicted behavior for increasing degrees of “featural blindsight” at values of σ from 0.01 to 1 in steps of 0.01.


Goodness of fit

The goodness of fit of both models—the Bayesian ideal observer and the “featural blindsight” observer at various levels of Type 2 noise —was calculated as the multinomial log-likelihood (Lm) of the model with parameters ϕ given the data. This measure quantifies the relative agreement between the data collected from participants and that predicted by a model. We use the following formula:

where Sj is the type of stimulus that might be shown on a given trial, and Ri refers to the behavioral response a subject produces on that trial. ndata(Ri|Sj) represents the count of how many times a human observer produced response Ri after viewing stimulus Sj. Pϕ(Ri|Sj) represents the model’s prediction of the probability a subject produced response Ri after viewing stimulus Sj, according to the model with parameters ϕ, i.e., the percentage of time the model produced this “response” to this “stimulus.” Importantly, the multinomial log-likelihood quantifies the fit of the full distribution of probabilities of each response type given each stimulus type, not just with reference to a summary statistic.

We used this metric to evaluate the predictions of both models at all levels of Type 1 performance exhibited by each human observer. Note that for the ideal observer, there are no free parameters; for the “featural blindsight” observer with Type 2 noise, the only parameter ϕ is the magnitude of the Type 2 noise.


Results

Two subjects had incomplete data and our exclusion criteria led us to exclude another two subjects from our analyses, leaving 29 subjects. Across subjects, the stronger three (out of the four) levels of emotion presented typically led to above-chance performance for each emotion intensity: 5% emotion (mean% correct = 49.92 ± SD 0.053), 15% emotion (mean% correct = 0.613 ± SD 0.091), 25% emotion (mean% correct = 0.701 ± SD 0.106), and 75% emotion (mean% correct = 0.897 ± SD 0.139). A one-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed the expected increase in Type 1 performance (“% correct emotion discrimination”) as a function of increasing emotional intensity [F(2.386) = 105.223, P < 0.001, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected for sphericity violation; all subsequent cases with Greenhouse-Geisser correction are marked with G]. Likewise, subjects’ ability to bet on the EP interval also increased with increasing emotional intensity as expected (F(2.112) = 35.840, P < 0.001G].

The critical analysis is whether subjects show emotion processing “featural blindsight.” Following the definitions introduced by Peters and Lau (2015), if subjects show such emotion processing ability without awareness, we would expect that there would be some level of objective performance capacity (“% correct emotion discrimination” > 50% in the EP interval) at which subjects had no ability to meaningfully bet on their choices (“% bet on EP interval” = 50%). To look for this possibility, we plotted the “% bet on EP interval” values against the “% correct emotion discrimination” values for each subject, and fit a smoothing spline [using Matlab’s smoothingspline function, which minimizes the expression, with the smoothing parameter set to 0.99] to the data across all subjects. Data from individual subjects closely resembles the group data, and analogous analyses using d′ in the EP interval (d′EP) and d′ in selecting the interval containing the emotional face (d′2IFC) revealed similar results.

From visual inspection alone, we see no evidence of emotion processing “featural blindsight”: as soon as subjects are able to correctly identify the emotion in the EP interval, they are able to meaningfully bet on their choices to some degree. The pattern of the data closely mimics the failure to observe blindsight-like behavior in normal observers using low-level visual stimuli, in which the target-absent interval (here the EA interval) contained no stimulus at all (Peters and Lau 2015). It also visually matches predicted behavior from a Bayesian ideal observer.

However, because this study was done online through Amazon mTurk, the data for individual subjects is somewhat noisier than it would be had subjects each completed many hours of psychophysics, as they did in the original Peters and Lau (2015) study. Therefore, we rely on the quantitative goodness of fit metrics to critically evaluate whether any hint of “featural blindsight” might be present.

We calculated the goodness of fit as Lm for each human observer for the Bayesian ideal observer, and compared it to Lm for the “featural blindsight” observer model at each level of Type 2 noise (see Materials and Methods). This analysis revealed that as Type 2 noise increases—i.e., as “featural blindsight” becomes stronger—the model fits the data less and less well [main effect of Type 2 noise magnitude, F(1.141) = 15.541, P < 0.001G;. This interpretation was confirmed with a two-tailed paired samples t-test of the log likelihoods between σ = 0 (no Type 2 noise, i.e., Bayesian ideal observer) and σ = 1 (high Type 2 noise) confirms that goodness of fit decreases as Type 2 noise increases [t(28) = 3.926, P ≤ 0.001]. Thus, the Bayesian ideal observer with no Type 2 noise—i.e. the observer with no “featural blindsight”—provides the best explanation of the human subjects’ behavior.


Discussion

Here, we used a bias-free two-interval forced-choice (2IFC) method to examine whether facial emotion processing might reveal blindsight-like behavior in normal human observers. We modified a previous version of this paradigm (Peters and Lau 2015) to match low-level visual properties such as luminance, contrast, and spatial frequency differences between the Emotion Present (EP) and Emotion Absent (EA) intervals; our goal was to reveal emotion processing “featural blindsight,” in which observers would be able to correctly identify an emotion when it was present but have no ability to introspect on the evidence or process leading to their choices. However, despite previous reports suggesting that emotion processing may bypass conscious visual processing areas (Pessoa and Adolphs 2010; Watanabe and Haruno 2015; Diano et al. 2016; Khalid and Ansorge 2017) and that emotional (especially fearful) stimuli may be powerful candidates for inducing blindsight-like behavior (Vieira et al. 2017), here we saw no evidence to suggest that emotion-processing “featural blindsight” may occur.

These results are in line with the absence of evidence for blindsight-like behavior reported in the original Peters and Lau (2015) study (which used forward–backward masking and simple visual stimuli), as well as the observation that various masking techniques fail to produce differences in the relationship between objective versus subjective thresholds (Knotts et al., 2018). Our observations also support the finding that even noninvasive transcranial magnetic stimulation fails to produce the ability to discriminate a stimulus in the absence of any visual awareness or confidence (Peters et al. 2017). Taken together, the evidence appears to be mounting that it is extremely difficult—if not impossible—to use visual masking or noninvasive techniques to produce dissociations between performance and awareness that would be ideal for experimentally isolating subjective consciousness.

However, despite the consistency of the present results with previous reports, it should certainly be noted that the data collection method we used here was quite different from the standard approach. Each of our subjects completed only 112 trials in the main experiment across four levels of emotion intensity, which is significantly less than the volume of data collected in e.g. the original study (2600 trials; Peters and Lau 2015). One could argue that the online data collection method, with so few trials per subject, may preclude the possibility of detecting the blindsight-like effect we hoped to reveal. In response, we note that each of our 29 subjects’ data looks much like the data in aggregate, and that the goodness of fit metrics were calculated for each subject individually rather than for the group average. That we identified decreasing goodness of fit for increasing Type 2 noise, despite the noisiness of online data collection and the small trial numbers, suggests that the data collection method was not so noisy as to prevent the possibility of identifying emotion processing “featural blindsight.” Future studies may wish to follow-up the results presented here with additional variations, done both in the laboratory and in an online setting.

Another way to check whether our online data collection method produces meaningful data would be to compare the emotional discrimination results to previous reports. In another study of emotion processing and confidence, it was reported that fear processing is “special”: when perceiving a fearful face human subjects show a liberal bias in both detection and discrimination tasks, and “fear” choices are also reported with higher confidence (Koizumi et al. 2016). We used signal detection theoretic approaches (Green and Swets 1966; Macmillan and Creelman 2004) to examine whether the same biases would be present in our own data. Consistent with previous reports that fearful faces are perceived more easily or quickly (Milders et al. 2006; Phelps et al. 2006; Stein et al. 2009, Stienen and de Gelder 2011; Amting et al. 2010), we also saw a significant shift in the Type 1 decisional criterion that biased subjects to respond “fearful” more than “happy” at lower emotional intensities in both the EP [t5%(28) = 4.174, P < 0.001; t15%(28) = 3.917, P < 0.001; t15%(28) = 2.040, P = 0.051; 75% intensity N.S.; 5% and 15% intensities are significant with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons] and EA [t(28) = 5.219, P < 0.001] intervals. Interestingly, the magnitude of this shift when significant or trending (cEA = −0.600, c5% = −0.444, c15% = −0.352, c15% = −0.187) was somewhat larger than that reported by Koizumi et al. (2016) in their discrimination task (c ≈ −0.12). This result provides further evidence that online data collection, despite being impoverished relative to the controlled setting of the laboratory, may be a viable method for identifying even small effects.

It is interesting to note that the Bayesian ideal observer here, as in Peters and Lau (2015), may appear to show some level of performance without awareness—here in the form of featural blindsight as well—at low levels of performance, just above chance. However, we reiterate that this apparent performance without awareness is really due to a lack of statistical significance in the ability to “bet” on its choices as being different from chance in this very low region of the performance curve. In the present manuscript we implemented the Bayesian ideal observer with Monte Carlo simulations with a finite number of simulated trials for convenience, but mathematically, means that a Bayesian Ideal Observer with infinite compute – which could represent the entire posterior probability distribution—can “bet” above chance exactly as soon as it can discriminate a stimulus’ identity above chance. The appearance of performance without awareness for the ideal observer therefore only comes from limitations of the simulation.

Given the nature of the 2IFC task used here in the subjective rather than objective task (de Gardelle and Mamassian 2014; Peters and Lau 2015; de Gardelle et al. 2016; Mamassian 2020), it is important to clearly discuss how interval betting and emotion discrimination relate to constructs of subjective versus objective processing and the impact of these relationships on the interpretation of results. Here, interval betting is used to index subjective awareness because it relates to metacognition and 2IFC detection (Mamassian 2020) [although it should not be taken to mean that we equate awareness and subjective confidence (Rosenthal 2019); in contrast, emotion discrimination capacity provides an index of perceptual performance. We acknowledge that the relationships between these measures and the constructs they assume to quantify in the present project are not necessarily universally agreed-upon, especially when it comes to the relationship between metacognition and awareness (Nelson 1996; Rosenthal 2019). Yet these concepts have become increasingly tightly coupled both empirically and theoretically (Brown et al. 2019; Lau 2019; Lau and Brown, 2019), so despite their theoretical distinction it can be argued that metacognitive judgments such as those used here provide a sufficient indicator for conscious awareness in experimental contexts.

The present results—and previous studies showing similar failure to induce blindsight-like behavior using generally accepted methods for doing so (Peters and Lau 2015; Peters et al. 2017a)—present a growing challenge to the dominant view that stimulus manipulation and/or noninvasive brain stimulation may result in task performance capacity in the absence of introspective access (Merikle 1982; Reingold and Merikle 1988; Kolb and Braun 1995; Merikle et al. 2001; Boyer et al. 2005; Charles et al. 2013). We acknowledge that the growing body of work we add to here does not speak definitively to the impossibility of inducing dissociations between the objective and subjective thresholds in normal human observers—i.e., they do not support the possibility of inducing d′ > 0 (above objective threshold) without accompanying awareness (below subjective threshold). However, these results do increasingly suggest that inducing blindsight-like perceptual capacity in the absence of introspective access may be much more difficult to induce than commonly believed (Heeks and Azzopardi 2015). Consequently, demonstrating such a dissociation using this conservative 2IFC confidence method would provide indisputable evidence that blindsight can be induced in normal observers if one employs the appropriate experimental manipulations.


Data accessibility statement

The code used in the simulations and data presented here can be found at https://github.com/vrsivananda/Faces_2IFC_Task.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


Contributor Information

Sivananda Rajananda, Department of Bioengineering, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Jeanette Zhu, Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Megan A K Peters, Department of Bioengineering, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA; Department of Cognitive Science, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The code used in the simulations and data presented here can be found at https://github.com/vrsivananda/Faces_2IFC_Task.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


People confabulate with high confidence when their decisions are supported by weak internal variables

Benjamin Rebouillat, Jean Maurice Leonetti, Sid Kouider — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC7959213, CC BY 4.0.

People can introspect on their internal state and report the reasons driving their decisions but choice blindness (CB) experiments suggest that this ability can sometimes be a retrospective illusion. Indeed, when presented with deceptive cues, people justify choices they did not make in the first place, suggesting that external cues largely contribute to introspective processes. Yet, it remains unclear what are the respective contributions of external cues and internal decision variables in forming introspective report. Here, using a brain–computer interface, we show that internal variables continue to be monitored but are less impactful than deceptive external cues during CB episodes. Moreover, we show that deceptive cues overturn the classical relationship between confidence and accuracy: introspective failures are associated with higher confidence than genuine introspective reports. We tracked back the origin of these overconfident confabulations by revealing their prominence when internal decision evidence is weak and variable. Thus, introspection is neither a direct reading of internal variables nor a mere retrospective illusion, but rather reflects the integration of internal decision evidence and external cues, with CB being a special instance where internal evidence is inconsistent.

Keywords: metacognition, agency, intention, volition, contents of consciousness, brain–computer interface

People’s introspection about their decisions is subject to illusions such as choice blindness.

A brain–computer interface was used to track people’s choices and manipulate external feedback cues online.

Introspective reports are influenced both by internal decision variables and external cues.

Introspective illusions occur when internal decision evidence is unreliable.

Confident confabulations result from a biased integration in which external cues dominate.


Introduction

Humans constantly monitor their choices and actions to adapt their behavior (Ericson and Simon 1980; Ridderinkhof et al. 2004; Ullsperger and von Cramon 2004; Walton et al. 2004). This ability typically involves introspective mechanisms that are used to evaluate and justify decisions (Moshman 2014). Yet, introspection turns out to be unreliable on many occasions (Nisbett and Wilson 1977). For instance, participants can believe they have intentionally performed an action that was actually initiated by another agent (Wegner and Wheatley 1999; Wegner 2017). Similarly, participants can confabulate about why they choose an option while they actually made the opposite choice in the first place (Johansson et al. 2005, Hall et al. 2010). A striking example of introspective illusion is given by choice blindness (CB) experiments. In this paradigm, participants select which one of two faces is more attractive, and are then presented with the option they selected and asked to justify their decision. On some trials, they are lured to have chosen the non-preferred face. Yet, they provide confabulated justifications about why this face is more attractive than the other. This phenomenon, which has been extended to economic decisions, political preferences and moral judgments, reveals that introspection can be, under certain circumstances, a retrospective illusion (Hall et al. 2012; Hall et al. 2013; McLaughlin and Somerville 2013; Strandberg et al. 2018).

Yet, participants have also been shown to have reasonable introspective access to the elements driving their decisions (Ericson and Simon 1980; Grover 1982; Schultze-Kraft et al. 2016; Reyes et al. 2018; Parés-Pujolràs et al. 2019). These apparently contradicting results could be reconciliated under an integrative account of introspection where both internal decision variables and external, contextual cues contribute to participants’ introspective reports. Yet, although such view began to receive empirical support (Schultze-Kraft et al. 2020), the modalities under which these two components could be integrated during introspective processes remained unsettled.

One way to investigate the formation of introspection about decisions consists in studying how internal decision variables impact CB episodes. In line with previous Bayesian integrative accounts of introspective processes (Moore and Fletcher 2012; Legaspi and Toyoizumi 2019), we predicted that the impact of internal decision evidence on introspection would be mediated by its availability and reliability. Furthermore, we expected that integrative processes would modulate not only the quantity of introspective failures (i.e. the amount of CB episodes) but also their quality (i.e. how much participants are convinced in their confabulation). That is, when a reliable source of external cue sometimes provides a deceptive information, participants would confabulate with high confidence when their internal decision evidence is weak.

Here, to address this issue, we relied on a brain–computer interface (BCI) setup to track participants’ internal decision variables during the original choice (i.e. prior to the external cue and report). Participants had to freely choose to preferentially attend to one out of two overlapping stimuli while their EEG (electroencephalogram) was recorded and a marker of selective attention was measured in real-time (decision phase). Recent neuroimaging studies revealed that top-down attentional mechanism reflect decision processes (Gottlieb and Balan 2010; Roy et al. 2014; Hunt et al. 2018). Although we did not measure decision mechanisms per se, our neural index allowed us to track their consequence in the form of selectively attending to one category over the other. This BCI setup allowed not only to measure a proxy of internal decision evidence independently of introspective reports but also to control for the reliability of external cues. Following the decision phase, participants were presented with a feedback cue that matched their original choice in 75% of the trials (informative feedback). Importantly, they were presented with the alternative, non-preferred choice as the outcome of their recent decision in 25% of the trials (deceptive feedback). Moreover, in order to assess the impact of internal decision variables not only on the quantity of introspective failures but also on their quality, participants were asked to rate the confidence they experienced in their decision.


Materials and Methods


Participants

Thirty healthy participants with normal or corrected-to-normal vision took part in the experiment [14 males; all right-handed; mean age: 25.1 years, standard error to the mean (SEM) = 3.4]. Two additional participants were tested but were not included in the analysis because of EEG artifacts (N = 1) or technical failures (N = 1) altering the online experiment. All participants signed a written consent and received financial compensation in exchange for their participation. This experimental protocol was approved by the local ethical committee (Conseil d'évaluation éthique pour les recherches en santé, Paris, France).

Participants performed 480 trials in the main experiment. All trials contained a decision and feedback phase. The feedback was informative in 75% of the trials, but deceptive in the remaining 25%. Introspective reports were required on all deceptive trials, but only on a third of the informative trials, in order to balance them across cue validity. This led to the analysis of 120 deceptive trials and 120 informative trials per participant. In addition, 16 out of the 30 participants underwent a session with a control condition consisting of an extra 160 control trials where no feedback was presented, here again with half the trials including introspective reports. To account for potential order effect, the control session was presented after one-third, two-thirds or at the end of the main experiment.


Visual stimulation

Visual stimuli consisted of the superposition of two half transparent animated images, a face and a spiral, at the center of the screen (Iiyama ProLite E2483HS-B3). The spiral rotated around its center while the face alternatively opened and closed its mouth. Such superposition of half transparent animated streams has been shown to reduce the stability of the percept containing the two streams and thus facilitates the voluntary switch from one item to the other (Neisser and Becklen 1975; Clark 2017; Ransom et al. 2017). In addition, the two animated streams had to evoke distinguishable brain responses in order for our BCI to decode the attentional focus of the participant. We therefore continuously modulated the spatial phase scrambling of each item, eliciting “sweep” steady state visually evoked potential (ssVEP) responses (Ales et al. 2012; Norcia et al. 2015) at the frequency of 1.875 Hz for both streams but in temporal phase opposition.

To build our animated stimuli, we used 12 images of a face regularly spanning an animation of mouth opening and 8 images of a homemade spiral at different steps of a rotation animation. We cropped each image with a Gaussian filter to obtain smooth edges. We then inserted each image in a noisy background with the same Fourier amplitude. As a result, the items of both categories appear to emerge from the noise as phase scrambling decreases (Ales et al. 2012). Then, for each step of animation and each item we selected the correct amount of phase scrambling to produce the desired sweep ssVEP. Spatial phase scrambling was computed by a phase interpolation method (Ales et al. 2012). Finally, we superimposed pairs of images to create a complete dynamic stimulus of two superimposed animated images, producing oscillatory signals at the same frequency but in phase opposition.

In half of the trials, participants were asked to report the object of their decision (i.e. object they had decided to preferentially attend) and how confident they were about this decision. Both the object of decision and their confidence in that decision were reported at the same time on a four levels scale. Eight circles were thus displayed on a horizontal line (i.e. four circles for each object). A reference central dot was displayed between the two most central circles to ensure forced-choice decisions. Participants reported their decision by choosing to move the dot either to the left or to the right (counterbalanced across trials), and their confidence was rated by choosing a circle that was close (very unconfident) or far (very confident) from the reference central dot.


EEG recording

We recorded scalp EEG using a 64-channel Biosemi ActiveTwo system (Biosemi, Amsterdam, Netherlands). EEG analog signal was digitized at a 2048 Hz sampling rate. During recording, electrode offset was reduced to between ±50 μV for each individual electrode by softly abrading the underlying scalp with a blunt plastic needle and insulating the electrode tip with saline gel (Sigma Gel, Parker Laboratories, USA).


Brain–computer interface


Overview

Our setup comprises one decoding computer and one stimulation computer. The stimulation computer continuously displays the visual stimulation (overlapping face and spiral) placed at the center of the screen oscillating in phase opposition. During the real-time experiment (practice, experimental and control phases), the decoding computer continuously receives EEG data and loads them in a buffer for on-line analysis (Oostenveld et al. 2011). Data are also saved for later offline analysis. During on-line analysis, the decoding computer outputs correlation scores for both items presented on the stimulation screen to the stimulation computer. At the end of each trial, the stimulation computer decides based on the correlation scores which stimulus has been preferentially attended during the decision phase.


Decoding procedure

The decoding model was inspired by backward models of stimulus reconstruction used in recent psychoacoustics studies (O’Sullivan et al. 2015). The decoding computer continuously receives EEG data at a rate of 2048 Hz. Before further processing, the recorded data is down-sampled to 256 Hz. The EEG data is next filtered between 1 and 30 Hz with a one-pass Butterworth filter of order 6 and re-referenced to the average signal. Then from a 3 s segment R of EEG data, we try to infer a unidimensional signal Ŷ called the reconstructed signal that represents the visual stimulus most probably attended by the subject during this segment. Along the reconstructed signal, we also compute a representation of the two concurrent visual stimuli (the oscillation of the face and the oscillations of the spiral) called YF and YS (Andersen and Müller 2015). The reconstructed signal Ŷ and the abstract representations YF and YS of the visual stimuli are vectors with one value per time sample (256 samples/s in our case). The correlations scores cF and cS are obtained by correlating Ŷ and YF on one hand and Ŷ and YS on the other hand.

The stimulation computer thus receives one pair of correlation scores (cF, cS) every 250 ms computed over the three past seconds. Correlation scores were saved for offline analysis on the one hand and used to infer the preferentially attended item of the current trial on the other hand. At the end of the trial, we averaged the correlation scores over the last 1.5 s of the decision phase (6 correlations scores) for the face and spiral, respectively. The item having the higher averaged scores is designated as preferentially attended by the participants for this trial.

Then the stimulation computer displays the appropriate feedback given the attended item (guessed by the model described beforehand) and the nature of the trial. This feedback corresponds to the decoded decision during the whole practice phase and for informative trials of the experimental phase. For deceptive trials of the experimental phase, the opposite item was displayed as feedback.

The reconstructed signal is obtained by applying a linear operation to the EEG data matrix R of dimensions time by channels. The model comprises a series of so-called lags τk that account for how the stimulus experienced at time t influences the EEG data at time t + τk. More precisely, we have

where c stands for channel and k for an index of our list of lags and wck are the coefficients that define the backward model.

The model was trained from EEG data collected during the BCI training phase. Each trial was labeled with the item (face or spiral) the participants were asked to attend to during this trial. The EEG data were preprocessed prior to the training of the model by applying a common average reference (mean EEG is subtracted from all channels) and filtering between 1 and 30 Hz with the same one pass Butterworth filter of order 6 that we use for online decoding procedure.

We find the coefficients wck of the backward model by solving the regression problem

where the regressor variable X contains EEG data from all trials and channels and Y contains the representation of the attended stimulus at each trial (see details in O’Sullivan et al. 2015). To evaluate the accuracy of this model, we used a cross-validation procedure on all trials from the BCI training phase. The decoding accuracy of the model reached 78.1% (SD = 11.6%). The results of this cross-validation procedure for each individual are shown in.


Experimental procedure

The experimental protocol was divided in three phases: participants first underwent the BCI training and the participants’ practice phases before performing the main phase. The main phase consisted of three identical blocks to which we added a 4th control block for 16 participants.


BCI training phase

To allow our BCI to decode the preferentially attended item in real time, we first gathered labeled data to train the participant’s individual model. At the beginning of each of the 30 trials of this phase, a target was designated by a letter (F for face, S for spiral) overlapping a fixation cross at the center of the screen for 1 s. Participants were asked to preferentially attend the designated items during the whole 5 s of the trial.

Instructions were given as follows: “You will see two superimposed items, a face and a spiral. At the beginning of each trial one of them will be designated as the current target. We will ask you to focus as much as you can on the target for the 5 s during which the image is displayed on the screen. Please refrain any eye movement while the image is displayed”.


Participants’ practice phase

Participants were then offered to familiarize with the BCI setup for 20 training trials. Further details on this phase can be found in the.


Main phase

Participants then performed 480 trials presented in three successive blocks of 160 trials of 5 s. Visual stimulation was continuously displayed on the screen across trials and disappeared only every eight trials. No target was designated and participants were encouraged to choose their object of attention (i.e. face or spiral) and to change at will across trials. As for the practice phase, feedback was provided for 500 ms at the end of each trial about the object participants preferentially attended. Crucially, feedback was only informative (reflecting the allegedly attended item) in 75% of the trials (Informative trials). In the remaining 25% of the trials, the other item was displayed instead (Deceptive trials). During one-third of the informative trials and during all deceptive trials, participants were asked to report the object they decided to attend, and to perform a confidence judgment about this decision (very unconfident, unconfident, confident, very confident). This distribution of report requests provides an equal amount of report following informative and deceptive trials for our analysis. Furthermore, it ensures that receiving a report request does not inform participants on whether the feedback was informative or deceptive.

Instructions were given as follows: “In this phase you will not be asked to attend a specific target. Please decide which one you would like to focus on. You can switch to the alternative item whenever you feel like doing it. Please refrain from adopting a specific strategy or trying to create a sequence. Regularly, feedback about your decision will be displayed, as for the previous phase. Moreover, you will sometimes be asked to report what object you were attending at the moment and to rate your confidence about this report. Importantly, the feedback you receive can sometimes be deceptive, not reflecting what you were focusing on. Finally, please restrain your eye movement to period without stimulus on screen or when you are reporting your decision.”


Control phase

Sixteen participants performed one block of 160 trials for the control phase. This phase is the same as in the Main phase except that no feedback was provided at the end of the trials. The control block and the three blocks of the main phase were presented in random order counterbalanced across participants.

Instructions were given as follows: “This block is the same as the previous one except that you will not receive any feedback regarding your recent decision.”


Data processing


Internal decision evidence

For each trial, we compute a correlate of participants’ internal evidence supporting their recent decision. During the decision phase, our BCI outputs every 250 ms correlation scores associated with each object computed over 3 s long window. These correlation scores reflect how close are the brain signals from being generated by the observation of the face or the spiral respectively. Then, our proxy for internal (decision) evidence (IE) consists in the absolute value of the accumulated difference between the correlation scores associated with each object over the last 1.5 s of the decision phase (including 4.5 s of data in total), and measures how EEG signals separate the two items over the 4.5 s before the feedback apparition.


Accuracy of introspective reports

We determined for every trial the preferentially attended item the same way we did it online (see Decoding procedure in brain–computer interface section of the Methods). We operationalized introspective accuracy as being correct when the reported object matches the object decoded by the BCI (e.g. for instance face reported, face decoded), and incorrect otherwise (e.g. face reported, spiral decoded).


Confidence in introspective report

At the end of the trials, participants reported the confidence they have in their decision along with the decision itself on a 2 × 4 points scale. Confidence reports were median-split, reports of confidence 1 and 2 were labeled as “Low confidence” trials and reports of 3 and 4 were labeled as “High confidence”. For modeling purposes, confidence was coded as a 2-level factor.


Consistency of internal decision evidence

We computed an index approximating for each trial the ratio of the internal decision evidence strength over its variance. Our consistency index is thus described by the formula:

where Internal Evidence is described in the previous paragraph and Var(Correlation difference) represents the bootstrapped variance of the correlation difference over the period of accumulation (3 s before the feedback apparition).


Statistical analysis

Summary statistics were calculated in Matlab (Matlab 2018, The MathWorks, Inc.). All other statistical tests were calculated in R [R version 3.6.0 (Team 2012)]. Before applying pairwise comparison, the Shapiro–Wilk method was used to test for the normality of the data. If the normality hypothesis was not rejected, we applied a two-sided paired Student’s t-test to our data. Data containing too many empty values or not meeting normality assumptions were analyzed with Wilcoxon rank test. Holm–Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons were calculated with R. Cohen d was calculated using the R effsize library (Torchiano 2016) for approximating effect size.

Both linear mixed effect models and generalized linear mixed effect models (GLMEs) were fitted using lmer4 packages (Bates et al. 2015). Cumulative linked mixed models were fitted using ordinal package (Christensen 2019) and using the full (4 points) confidence scale. To operate model reduction we removed non or least significant terms and compared Akaike information criterion of more complex and simplified models. Moreover, we ran a Chi-square test to decide whether the more complex model was significantly better at explaining our data. The reported P-values of each fixed effect of linear mixed-effects models and generalized linear mixed-effects models were obtained with this Chi-square test comparing one model with all the possible simplification obtained by removing a single effect. For each model, we detailed the model reduction procedure.


Results


Impact of internal decision evidence and external cues on introspection

Does introspection integrate internal evidence supporting just-made decisions or is it a pure reconstructive process shaped by external cueing? We here operationalize the report accuracy as being correct when the reported object matches the object decoded by the BCI (e.g. for instance face reported, face decoded), and incorrect otherwise (e.g. face reported, spiral decoded). Together with this measure of report accuracy, we computed a proxy for internal evidence (IE) supporting the recent decision. IE measures how strongly participants preferentially attended one object over the other one (see Methods). Finally, the type of feedback cue displayed on each trial was encoded as either deceptive (opposite to IE in 25% of the trials) or informative (corroborating the IE in 75% of the trials). In the case of a deceptive feedback, a correct report corresponds to a genuine introspection while an incorrect report corresponds to a confabulation. However, in the case of informative trials, reports accuracy does not inform on the nature of introspective mechanisms because participants can be correct just by blindly accepting the feedback (see for more details). To determine the respective influences of internal decision evidence and external information on introspective processes, we modeled accuracy using IE and the type of feedback cue as fixed effect and participants as random effect.

We first thought to determine the relationship between the internal evidence that was available during the decision phase and the accuracy of introspective reports. As shown in, report accuracy significantly increases with the amount of internal evidence [GLME: odds ratio (OR) = 1.33, confidence interval (CI) (1.26–1.41), χ2 = 211.5, P < 0.001]. Yet, an alternative hypothesis would be that trials with high IE are less subject to decision misclassification by the BCI. In such case, participants would systematically correctly report their recent decision, yet, classification and thereby accuracy will be higher for trials showing high IE. To account for this alternative interpretation, we compared the internal evidence in correct and incorrect trials during the practice phase. In this phase, participants were assigned to focus on a given item such that correct trials could be interpreted as BCI correct classification and incorrect trial as a misclassification. Results are shown in and confirm that IE is not affected by the accuracy of our BCI classification [LMER: estimate = 0, CI (−0.25 to 0.26), χ2 = 0.00, P > 0.9]. Indeed, internal evidence did not differ between correct and incorrect classification (pairwise comparison: z = −0.39, P > 0.5), ruling out the possibility that an IE reflects classification performance.

Furthermore, the type of feedback had a significant influence on introspective reports as we observed a higher accuracy following an informative feedback (M = 0.71, SD = 0.11), compared with a deceptive feedback (M = 0.57, SD = 0.16) (more detail on and) [OR = 1.72, CI (1.45–2.04), χ2 = 151.2, P < 0.001], revealing that the type of contextual cue influences introspective reports. Importantly, the nature of the feedback could not influence the accuracy of the BCI classifier. Indeed, the nature of the feedback was assigned for each trial before the beginning of the experiment and independently of the on-line classification process. Moreover, we found no significant interaction between IE and the type of feedback [OR = 1.04, CI (0.98–1.17), χ2 = 2.2, P > 0.1], revealing that feedback cues modulate the accuracy of introspective reports regardless of the internal information available during the decision phase.

Are introspective reports modulated by both deceptive and informative feedback cues? To address this question, we compared the effect of each type of feedback to a baseline condition where no feedback was provided. Sixteen out of the 30 participants performed an additional block with the exact same structure except that no feedback cue was presented between the decision and report phase. Nature of the feedback impact participants’ report accuracy (GLMER χ2 =86.1, P < 0.001). The results of this control session confirm that informative feedback presentation increases the accuracy of participants’ reports compared with reports without feedback [GLMER, OR = 1.45, CI (1.24–1.70), χ2 = 21.3, P < 0.001]. Conversely, we observed that accuracy decreases following a deceptive feedback compared to a condition without feedback [GLMER, OR = 0.74, CI (0.63–0.86), χ2 = 15.1, P < 0.001, see, and Results]. Together, these results reveal that both internal decision evidence and external cues influence participants’ introspective reports.


Metacognitive failures

We then studied whether external cueing impacts not only reports, but also decision confidence. Confidence is known to track performance for decisions conducted under perceptual uncertainty (Yeung and Summerfield 2012; Pouget et al. 2016). Therefore, we aimed at investigating the relationship between introspection and confidence, and in particular whether the misleading influence of the deceptive feedback would also impact the confidence associated with introspective reports. We thus modeled introspection accuracy using confidence and the type of the feedback as fixed effect and participants as random effect.

We found that when participants are presented with a deceptive feedback cue, the classical relationship between confidence and accuracy is overturned. We observed a significant interaction between the nature of the feedback and the confidence attributed to decision reports [GLME: OR = 3.46, CI (2.29–4.01), χ2 = 274.4, P < 0.001]. Indeed, when participants received an informative feedback, we found a positive correlation between confidence and report accuracy (high confidence: M = 0.80, SEM = 0.02; low confidence: M = 0.58, SEM = 0.03, z = 5.2, d = 1.53, P < 0.0001 signed-rank test). However, strikingly, when participants received a deceptive feedback, this correlation was inverted, with confidence rising up as accuracy decreased (high confidence: M = 0.46, SEM = 0.04; low confidence: M = 0.66, SEM = 0.03, z = −4.19, d = −1.07, P < 0.0001 signed-rank test). Moreover, we found that participants exhibit a lower confidence after genuine introspection (M = 1.39 SEM = 0.04) than for their confabulations (M = 1.58, SEM = 0.04) (signed rank test, z = 4.6, d = 0.93, P < 0.0001). Together, these results reveal that a deceptive feedback can not only delude participants about the choices they made (i.e. CB) but also falsify the feeling of confidence they associated with their introspection (i.e. aberrant metacognitive failures).


Reliability of internal decision evidence

How can external cues impact qualitative aspect of introspection such as the confidence? To better understand the underlying mechanisms of this overconfident confabulations, we investigated the conditions that permit external cues to prevail during introspective reports. The human brain constantly integrates information coming from multiple noisy sources. Several models propose that in multi-sensory perception, the respective participation of each source of evidence to the final percept is regulated by their own strength and reliability (Ernst and Banks 2002; Knill and Pouget 2004; Moore and Fletcher 2012). Here, we propose that a similar mechanism operates between internal decision evidence and external cues in the production of introspective reports. Since external cues are kept constant, introspective processes should be dominated by external cues if the internal decision evidence are inconsistent (i.e. weak and noisy).

We built an index of internal consistency accounting for the strength and reliability of internal decision evidence during each trial. To compute internal consistency, we took for each trial the ratio of the internal decision evidence strength divided by its variance (see Methods). Then, to understand how internal decision consistency evolves during confident confabulations, we modeled internal consistency using accuracy and confidence as fixed effect and participants as random effect. To distinguish confabulations from genuine introspection, this analysis was restricted to deceptive trials. We predicted that confabulations associated with high confidence correspond to decisions supported by low internal consistency. In such cases, external cues should prevail in the formation of introspective reports, both in the reported decision and in the associated confidence.

First, participants’ introspective accuracy increases with internal consistency [GLMER, OR = 1.25, CI (1.17–1.32), χ2 = 56.5, P < 0.001, see and. In other terms, when internal variables are weak and noisy, participants’ introspective reports tend to reflect external cues rather than their recent decision. On the other hand, when internal variables are consistent, participants’ reports reflect their original decision despite deceiving external cues.

Furthermore, to assess the effect of internal consistency on confidence for genuine introspection and confabulations, we regress confidence using consistency and introspective accuracy as predictors. Confidence in genuine introspection increases with internal variables consistency [CLMM, OR = 1.09, CI (1.02–1.17), χ2 = 6.1, P < 0.05]. However, this relationship was inverted for confabulation [CLMM, OR = 1.20, CI (1.09–1.33), χ2 = 13.5, P < 0.001] since confidence decreases with internal consistency [CLMM, OR = 0.9, CI (0.84–0.97), χ2 = 8.4, P < 0.01].

Consequently, as shown in, confabulations with high confidence show markedly lower internal consistency compare with confabulation with low confidence [LMER: estimate = −0.11, CI (−0.21 to −0.01), χ2 = 4.9, P < 0.05] (low confidence: M = 0.15, SEM = 0.07; high confidence M = −0.08, SEM = 0.05), signed rank test z (29) =2.4, d = 0.51, P < 0.05. On the other side during genuine introspection, higher confidence tend to be supported by higher internal consistency [LMER: estimate = 0.07, CI (−0.01 to 0.15), χ2 = 2.9, P = 0.09] (low confidence: M = 0.35 SEM = 0.05; high confidence: M = 0.43, SEM = 0.06; paired t-test t (29) = −1.32, d = −0.19, P = 0.19).

Altogether, these results reveal that confabulation occurs when internal decision evidence are weak and noisy. Furthermore in such condition, external cues influence not only the content but also the metacognitive aspects of introspective reports on decision.


Discussion

In the present study, we used a BCI to covertly track a correlate of internal evidence supporting decisions and study how it affects introspective illusions. We found that participants’ introspective reports combine both internal decision evidence and external cues about their decisions. When presented with feedback cues that opposed their original internal decision evidence, participants tended to report it as reflecting their own decision. Furthermore, we found that the noisier and weaker was the original internal decision evidence, the more they were confident about having made the choice corresponding to the external cue. In other words, external cues dominate introspective reports and decision confidence when internal evidence supporting the original decision was inconsistent.

Combining multiple sources of noisy information has been proposed to account for multisensory perception (Ernst and Banks 2002; Knill and Pouget 2004) and for the sense of agency (Synofzik et al. 2008; Moore and Fletcher 2012; Legaspi and Toyoizumi 2019). The sense of agency appears to result from an integration of both internal motor signals (Blakemore et al. 2002; Haggard and Clark, 2003; Haggard, 2017) and external information (e.g. action outcome) (Moore and Haggard 2008; Moore et al. 2009). Moreover, this integration appears to follow Bayesian principles, whereby sources of information are weighted by their respective reliability (Moore and Fletcher 2012; Legaspi and Toyoizumi 2019). Here, we propose to extend this framework to account for introspective illusions such as CB. In the context of our study, both external cues and internal variables (here indexed by a correlate of internal evidence supporting the decision) can be considered as noisy sources of information with their own relative contributions to introspection. Therefore, we propose that external cues are combined with internal decision evidence in inverse proportion to internal evidence availability and reliability when forming introspective reports (for similar accounts in the perceptual domain, see Ernst and Banks 2002; Clark and Yuille 2013; Farrell and Lewandowsky 2018). That is, when a choice was made on the basis of weak or unreliable internal evidence, introspective reports are more likely to be dominated by exogenous elements such as the decision’s outcome feedback, thereby resulting in a CB episode.

To unravel which factors influence CB, previous studies relied on behavioral measures and compared the detection rate of deceptive trials across various types of stimuli. For instance, decisions involving familiar choices (e.g. known brands, political preferences, etc.) are rarely followed by CB episodes (Hall et al. 2010; Hall et al. 2012; Sauerland et al. 2014; Somerville and McGowan 2016; Rieznik et al. 2017; Strandberg et al. 2018). Our work offers an interpretation of those findings by suggesting that familiarity with the choices might increase the weight of internal decision evidence during introspection. Consequently, the influence of internal decision evidence on introspection will prevail over the influence of deceptive cues, thus improving introspective accuracy.

Conversely, one might expect a similar effect if, instead of increasing the consistency of internal decision evidence, it was the external outcome consistency that was decreased. For instance, a recent study (Reyes et al. 2018) manipulated the confidence that participants have on the experimenter and showed that they undergo stronger CB effects when the experimenter appears in control of the experimental setup or if they have been primed about her professionalism. On the other hand, when primed with an apparent lack of competence of the experimenter or if the experimenter looks overwhelmed by a fake bug on the experimental setup, the detection of deceptive trials largely increases.

Other attempts to address the underlying mechanisms of CB phenomena relied on linguistic analysis but failed to differentiate between reports following deceptive versus non-deceptive trials (Johansson et al. 2005, Johansson et al. 2008). Together with previous studies (Nisbett and Wilson 1977), these results argue that introspective reports are based on participants’ belief about their decision rather than the mental states supporting those decisions. Participants remain ignorant of those underlying mental states even in the absence of deceptive feedback (Petitmengin et al. 2013). Our results corroborate those conclusions by offering a mechanistic account for why no linguistic difference should be observed between reports following deceptive and non-deceptive feedback. Indeed in both types of trial, internal evidence supporting the decision can be weak and noisy, leading subsequent justifications to mostly reflect the feedback presentation rather than internal variables. Therefore, no difference should be expected in the justification of informative and deceptive trials.

While the use of confidence judgment is widespread in psychological studies, its relationship with confabulation is still unclear. While some argue that introspective illusions are subjectively indistinguishable from genuine introspection (Carruthers 2009), other studies show that illusions often come with a reduced confidence (Nisbett and Wilson 1977; Wheatley and Haidt 2005; Hall et al. 2012; Rieznik et al. 2017; Strandberg et al. 2018). Altogether, our results nuance this debate by showing that the subjective distinction between confabulation and genuine introspection depends on the availability and reliability of internal variables. When internal decision variables are weak and noisy, confabulation can’t be distinguished from genuine introspection, and both will be reported with high confidence (Carruthers 2009). If the consistency of the internal decision evidence is high, participants directly access their recent decision variables and easily detect external manipulations. Finally, if the internal evidence supporting decisions shows intermediate consistency, participants will eventually fail to notice external manipulation but their subjective experience will be affected as they report a lower confidence compared to genuine introspection (Fiala and Nichols 2009).

Although our task presents many similarities with the original CB paradigm, we must note that it also differs on several aspects. We manipulate the feedback more often (random ordering assignment in 25% of the trials) and in a more explicit manner (participants were informed of the potential deceptive nature of the outcome) compared with the original paradigm. Importantly, however, we still observed a large portion of CB episodes though reduced compared to the original study (40% here versus 60–80% in original study) (Johansson et al. 2005).

In the present study, we propose that participants could introspect on some of their internal information but remain subject to introspective illusions when those information are weak and noisy. Yet this interpretation relies on the assumption that our BCI decode accurately the object participants choose to focus on. Nonetheless, our BCI could sometimes misclassify participants decision, leading to the presentation of the opposite feedback. The reliability of our decoder approximated 78% during externally driven choice (i.e. the BCI training phase). In line with recent findings (Schurger et al. 2012; Murakami et al. 2014; Wisniewski et al. 2016; Brass et al. 2019), performance of the decoder should comparable during the main experiment. Yet, the condition of the decision differed between BCI training phase and the main experiment. If participants were assigned to focus for 5 s on a given item in the BCI training phase, they were free to switch at will in the latter condition. Therefore, our decoding method could be sensitive to decision changes in the last second of the decision phase. Moreover, we checked that the modulation of accuracy that we attributed to IE or internal consistency did not reflect instead variation in the BCI decoding performance. In addition, to account for the potential misclassification due to late change of decision, we first identified trials where those changes potentially occurred and confirmed our results after having removed them.


Conclusion

In conclusion, we combined a CB paradigm with a BCI to demonstrate that introspective reports about recent, private decisions result from the integration of internal evidence and external cues. When internal variables supporting the original choice are weak and noisy, participants accept external outcomes as their original intention even when the two are in contradiction. Moreover, our study reveals that not only the object of a decision but also the metacognitive aspects of this decision are subject to reconstruction. When internal decision evidence is weak or unreliable, participants show high confidence for their confabulations. Our study shed new lights on the mechanisms underlying introspective illusions, unraveling a continuum in the awareness people have about their decisions. Indeed, their introspective experience ranges from relying on internal information to being purely driven by external factors as a function of the availability and reliability of the evidence supporting their original decision.


Contributor Information

Benjamin Rebouillat, Brain and Consciousness Group (ENS, CNRS), Département d’Études Cognitives, École Normale Supérieure—PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France; Ecole Doctorale Cerveau Cognition Comportement, ENS/ParisVI/ParisV, Paris 75005, France.

Jean Maurice Leonetti, Brain and Consciousness Group (ENS, CNRS), Département d’Études Cognitives, École Normale Supérieure—PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France; Ecole Doctorale Cerveau Cognition Comportement, ENS/ParisVI/ParisV, Paris 75005, France.

Sid Kouider, Brain and Consciousness Group (ENS, CNRS), Département d’Études Cognitives, École Normale Supérieure—PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Conflict of interest statement. Some aspects of this work include technologies that S.K. and J.M.L. are inventors on for a patent that is owned by the CNRS. S.K. is a shareholder in NextMind. All other authors have declared no conflict of interest.


Segregated brain state during hypnosis

Jarno Tuominen, Sakari Kallio, Valtteri Kaasinen, Henry Railo — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC7959214, CC BY 4.0.

Can the brain be shifted into a different state using a simple social cue, as tests on highly hypnotizable subjects would suggest? Demonstrating an altered global brain state is difficult. Brain activation varies greatly during wakefulness and can be voluntarily influenced. We measured the complexity of electrophysiological response to transcranial magnetic stimulation in one ‘hypnotic virtuoso’. Such a measure produces a response arguably outside the subject’s voluntary control and has been proven adequate for discriminating conscious from unconscious brain states. We show that a single-word hypnotic induction robustly shifted global neural connectivity into a state where activity remained sustained but failed to ignite strong, coherent activity in frontoparietal cortices. Changes in perturbational complexity indicate a similar move towards a more segregated state. We interpret these findings to suggest a shift in the underlying state of the brain, likely moderating subsequent hypnotic responding.

Keywords: brain dynamics, hypnosis, metastability, transcranial magnetic stimulation


Introduction

Hypnotic suggestions can have profound effects on behaviour and experience in some individuals, e.g. producing realistic-seeming hallucinations (Oakley and Halligan 2013). At the heart of this debate is the question whether hypnosis changes the way the individual processes information. While this question is often framed by contrasting so-called state theories of hypnosis with socio-cognitive (‘non-state’) theories, this dichotomy is simplified, and hypnosis is likely best be explained by a combination of the two views (Kirsch and Lynn 1995; Kallio and Revonsuo 2003). Here, our aim is not to test between these two classes of theories. Instead, we solely focus on characterizing the global neural-level changes that accompany hypnosis. Our specific aim is to test whether the brain can be shifted to a fundamentally different dynamic state based on hypnotic induction.


Neural basis of hypnosis

What kinds of changes in brain activation and neural dynamics accompany hypnosis? While numerous studies (e.g. Kosslyn et al. 2000; Fingelkurts et al. 2007; Jiang et al. 2017) have shown hypnosis to be associated with changes in neural activation patterns, these findings are both inconclusive and inconsistent (Landry and Raz 2017). The observed changes could also simply reflect normal variation in brain activity (see e.g. Mazzoni et al. 2013). Furthermore, most studies have included a specific suggestion which makes it difficult to distinguish between changes in the background state configuration and the task-specific changes engaged by the suggestion. In this study, we concentrate on ‘neutral hypnosis’—a hypnotic induction without further suggestions—to investigate the changes brought about in brain dynamics by a simple single-word post-hypnotic induction.

Three networks have currently been implicated within hypnosis research: the salience network (SN), the central executive network (CEN), and the Default Mode Network (DMN) (Landry and Raz 2017). The SN and the CEN are essential for higher-order cognition, the former with awareness of internal and external events, and the latter with attention and anticipation, whereas the DMN (e.g. Gusnard and Raichle 2001; Raichle 2015) is concerned with internal attention, task-unrelated thought, self-referencing, and social cognition. In their meta-analytic review, Landry and Raz (2017) assessed the activity and connectivity between these three networks as likely enablers of the absorption that facilitates top-down effects and hypnotic responding. Interestingly they found no consistent support for any of the networks, only for the lingual gyrus—a brain area associated with mental imagery. It can be concluded that while hypnotic induction alters the background dynamics of the brain to mediate the effects of specific suggestions (e.g. Oakley 2012, 379), there is little consensus within the extant data for its sufficient causes.


What is the perturbational complexity index?

Reduced states of consciousness—including vegetative state, minimally conscious state, anaesthetized state, coma, and NREM sleep—can all be distinguished from wakeful consciousness by using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and quantifying the resulting patterns of activation (Casali et al. 2013; Sarasso et al. 2015; Casarotto et al. 2016). This ‘perturbational complexity’ index (PCI) allows quantification of the brain’s potential both to segregate (i.e. differentiate) and integrate information (Casali et al. 2013). In practice, it is a measure of normalized algorithmic complexity arrived at by compressing the spatiotemporal pattern of perturbed cortical activations. Thus, a PCI value of zero indicates a completely integrated system, and a value of one a completely segregated or random system. Studies have shown that patients with reduced states of consciousness have a lower PCI, with values ˂0.31 generally considered to indicate unconsciousness (Casali et al. 2013; Sarasso et al. 2015; Casarotto et al. 2016). Normal wakeful consciousness is associated with intermediate PCI values, reflecting an optimal balance between integration and segregation (Casali et al. 2013; Casarotto et al. 2016). As of now there is no indication that PCI can be brought under volitional control, and a not-yet reviewed preprint indicates it to have a high intra- and inter-subject reliability (Caulfield et al. 2020).

PCI is often motivated through the Integrated Information Theory (IIT) of consciousness (Oizumi et al. 2014), which states that consciousness corresponds to different brain areas forming a complex system. PCI is used as a proxy of information integration, because it allows to probe the complexity of the system’s response to perturbation (Casali et al. 2013; Sarasso et al. 2015; Casarotto et al. 2016). PCI is also intimately linked with the concept of metastability which, just like IIT, denotes systems states where information integration and differentiation coexist in an optimal fashion. In metastable state, brain areas can share information while the overall system maintains the ability to change configuration dynamically: brain areas can engage with and disengage from the network while maintaining functional specificity (Kelso 2012; Tognoli and Kelso 2014). This is presumed (Kelso 2012) to allow adaptive behaviour through coordination of external (sensory) and internal (e.g. task-set) stimuli. To demonstrate the link between metastability and IIT, consider Mediano et al. (2016), who modelled metastable systems using Kuramoto oscillators. Metrics denoting metastability, information integration, and entropy all peaked around the same ‘transition region where the oscillators operate in a critical regime poised between order and disorder’ (Mediano et al. 2016, 2). Shift away from this region mediating complex behaviours is a shift towards less complex, integrated, or differentiated state (or hypersynchronized vs. desynchronized oscillatory states, respectively). We propose that this type of dynamic system’s view may shed important new information into how brain activity in hypnosis differs from normal wakefulness. A recent study of TMS-evoked activation in a single highly-trained subject undergoing self-induced cognitive trance found differences in, e.g. phase-locking, cortical synchrony, and increased phenomenological dissociation of the environment (Gosseries et al. 2019).


Current study

An arguably fruitful way to understand hypnosis is provided by studying the so-called ‘hypnotic virtuosos’; participants who are very highly hypnotizable and can respond a broad spectrum of hypnotic suggestions (Orne 1971; Weitzenhoffer 2000; Kallio and Revonsuo 2003). They provide a good starting point for studying the neural basis of hypnosis, exemplifying a token example of what generally is considered hypnosis in its clearest form. This approach should be appended by larger study designs from throughout the spectrum of hypnotic responding using the same paradigms. This would allow us to begin work on understanding both the individual differences and share commonalities of neural mechanisms of hypnotic responding.

Such a two-tier approach is in-line with the majority of recommendations of a recent review, staking the path for a better understanding of hypnosis (Jensen et al. 2017). The only note of discord between these suggestions and our current study is that we opted to use within participant control ‘condition’, not a control ‘group’. The motivation for this is 2-fold: given the high inter-individual variation in hypnosis research (Landry and Raz 2017) we wish to test our tentative hypothesis on a person who can consistently and reliably produce a strong hypnotic response, including hallucinatory experiences and resultant changes in behavioural measures (Kallio et al. 1999; Fingelkurts et al. 2007; Kallio et al. 2011; Kallio and Koivisto 2016). Second, following the single-subject study design tradition, we avoid generalizable claims and opt to isolate the topic of interest in this one atypically hypnotizable participant: given hypnosis is a true phenomenon with high variability, this showcases one possible instantiation of such a mechanism. By providing one well-controlled study on the exact changes in brain state configuration we can note this to be one way to undergo hypnosis, and make the argument that this in itself is a useful and fruitful approach to forward future research considerations. By simplifying our research setting to minimal complexity we minimize the presence of external factors that could affect our chosen measurements beyond hypnosis.

For our study, we opted for a perturbational TMS–EEG approach because of the way it allows characterization of the brain’s functional state, while the outcome (spread of TMS-elicited activation) is considered to rest beyond the subject’s voluntary control. We hypothesized that the psychological and behavioural changes associated with hypnosis are produced by a brain state in which the segregation/integration balance is different from normal waking consciousness: specifically, it is possible PCI should decrease as the subject enters hypnosis, reminiscent of other states where consciousness begins to fade (Casali et al. 2013) and brain activation becomes less complex. Such a prediction seemed sensible, given the relaxation techniques through which hypnotic induction is usually performed and the phenomenological relaxed experience often reported to accompany hypnosis (Banyai and Hilgard 1976; Rainville et al. 2002; Kahn and Hobson 2003; Wark 2006). It should be noted, however, that while experiential similarities have been cited, sleep and hypnosis are not typically considered to be similar to each other neurobiologically (Evans 1979). Meanwhile, any increase in PCI under hypnosis would indicate increased segregation in the thalamocortical networks. Thus, either a decrease or an increase in PCI would indicate a shift from metastable to less optimal dynamic state. By contrast, if hypnosis lies within the continuum of normal wakeful consciousness, PCI under hypnosis should not change from relaxed normal baseline. Additionally, we assessed the spatiotemporal dynamics following the TMS-perturbation to achieve a more detailed analysis of the underlying dynamics.


Materials and Methods


Participant

T.S.H. is a highly hypnotizable, 51-year-old female office worker with no history of psychiatric or neurological illness. She gave informed written consent to take part in the study and received a small fee for participation. She has been extensively evaluated in previous studies (Kallio et al. 1999; Fingelkurts et al. 2007; Kallio et al. 2011; Kallio and Koivisto 2016). She rates at maximum in the Stanford suggestibility scale (C, Weitzenhoffer and Hilgard 1962) designed to assess individual suggestibility, and is considered a model example of a somnambulic or ‘hypnotic virtuoso’ individual. She is able to experience a vast variety of hypnotic cognitive phenomena including vivid auditory and visual hallucinations, both positive and negative. These phenomena can also be induced post-hypnotically. The single-word induction allows for a consistent and controllable research setting. This makes her an ideal research participant for a possible mechanism of hypnosis-related changes in brain dynamics. Description of the relevant post-hypnotic suggestions and T.S.H.’s psychometric profile are available in (Kallio et al. 2011).


Procedure and stimuli

Electroencephalography (EEG; 64-electrode, 5 kHz sampling rate, NeurOne Tesla amplifier, Mega Electronics) DC recording was combined with single-pulse TMS. Electrode (Ag/AgCl electrodes) placement followed the international 10–20 system, with a ground electrode placed on the forehead and a reference electrode on the nose. An additional electrode was placed below the right eye and another at the right outer canthus to measure eye movements. To minimize TMS artefacts, impedances were brought to ∼1 kΩ before recording. Single biphasic TMS pulses at 65% maximal output were applied with a NexStim Eximia stimulator to the right calcarine sulcus with current direction lateral to medial during the second pulse phase. The location was chosen because it is easily accessible, feels comfortable to the subject, and was used in a previous study (Railo et al. 2016). Note that PCI is not significantly influenced by stimulation location (Casali et al. 2013). The stimulation location was neuro-navigated and monitored continuously using the NexStim NBS system, guided by 3T MRI images of the subject’s brain. The subject sat in a relaxed position with eyes closed. A chin rest was used to stabilize head motion. The subject wore foam earplugs through which constant Gaussian white noise was played to attenuate the sound of the TMS pulse. The test session took just over 2 h in total, including setup for the EEG recording. Altogether 167 pulses were applied in the hypnosis condition and 172 in the baseline condition within six alternating blocks. The subject was given time to rest between blocks.

Over the course of the session, the subject was hypnotized and the hypnosis cancelled via single-word cues delivered as post-hypnotic suggestion. This was facilitated by means of a prior hypnotization, using a standard hypnotic induction procedure (Shor and Orne 1962). T.S.H. was instructed that the word ‘hypno’ would function as a cue for hypnosis and ‘base’ for return to normal waking state. A video of the single-word cue induction of T.S.H. has been made available as a supplement to a previous publication (Kallio et al. 2011).

A short auditory stimulus was presented on average every 10 s. The subject was instructed to react via a simple button press on a keyboard. The auditory stimulus and button press were introduced to assess possible adverse effects during the stimulation and not included in the analysis. If the subject should fail to respond to the stimulus, the researchers would know to abort the session. Each auditory stimulus was separated by a minimum of 1.2 s from a TMS pulse.


Ethical considerations

The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Hospital District of Southwest Finland in alignment with the Helsinki declaration. Exclusion criteria for good TMS practices (Rossi et al. 2009) were followed. Informed consent was gained before the testing procedure began, and the procedure could be aborted at any time without ramifications.


Data processing

The EEG data were pre-processed using EEGlab version 13.4.4b (Delorme and Makeig 2004) on Matlab 2014b. To remove the TMS pulse artefact, 5 milliseconds (ms) data were cut and interpolated by a third-order polynomial curve (Reichenbach et al. 2011). Further pre-processing consisted of 500 Hz re-sampling, re-referencing to average, 0.1 Hz high-pass filtering, and line-noise removal using CleanLine. Eye blinks and remaining TMS artefacts were removed using ICA (runica algorithm) and visual inspection. The EEG recording was then segmented into 800 ms epochs, beginning from 400 ms before TMS stimulation. Epochs containing outliers (joint probability activity limit = 4 SDs) or where EEG amplitude crossed a threshold (±175 µV) relative to baseline were removed: 28 in all. Source reconstruction was carried out using SPM8 (Litvak et al. 2011), calculating a linear mapping between EEG sensory activity and dipoles distributed over the cortical surface (Dale and Sereno 1993). Montreal Neurological Institute brain-template mesh was used to model cortical anatomy, with the boundary elements model as a forward model. An empirical Bayesian approach (Lopez et al. 2014) with minimum norm constraint was used to calculate the inverse reconstruction. A 40 Hz low-pass filter was applied during source reconstruction. The source reconstruction was modelled for single trials as per (Casali et al. 2013) to keep the method for calculating PCI identical to the original. After pre-processing, the baseline and hypnosis datasets included 164 and 146 pulses respectively.

A non-parametric ‘bootstrap procedure’ (Casali et al. 2013) was run to estimate which dipoles were statistically significantly modulated by TMS. This method determines when and where the reconstructed post-stimulus activation differs in a statistically significant way from pre-stimulus activation. First, each source activity was z-transformed. Second, single-trial pre-stimulus samples were randomly shuffled to calculate a surrogate baseline for each source activity. Maximum absolute value across all sources was calculated to correct for multiple comparisons (Pantazis et al. 2005). The procedure was repeated 1000 times to obtain a null distribution. One-tailed 0.01 alpha level was used as threshold to determine which sources at a given time point differed in a statistically significant way from baseline. This yields a binary matrix of ones and zeros, denoting whether activity in a given dipole at a given time point is modulated by TMS. The spatiotemporal pattern of significant current density (SCD; Casali et al. 2010)— in the main text—shows the sum of source currents per time point in all sources displaying statistically significant modulation by TMS. shows the standard deviation of individual source activations across trials (the sum of all standard deviations across all dipoles is plotted). Broadband phase-locking (bPL) was calculated from single-trial source activations using the Hilbert transform. bPL values describe similarity of the phase across trials, with a range from zero (indicating random phases) to one (perfect phase-locking) (Sinkkonen et al. 1995; Tallon-Baudry et al. 1996).

PCI calculation was based on the binary matrix of significant sources. This was done by determining the Lempel-Ziv complexity of the matrix and normalizing the result by the source entropy of the statistically significant source activations (Casali et al. 2013): i.e. PCI values range from 0 to 1. Values close to 0 indicate that the EEG response can be characterized with little information; values close to 1 indicate a highly complex response. In other words, the PCI values describe the entropy of the neural response elicited by the TMS pulse. PCI is seen as indicative of the brain’s capacity to integrate information (Storm et al. 2017), with intermediate values understood to reflect an optimal balance between integration and segregation. While there is some individual variation in subjects’ PCI scores during waking consciousness, the differences observed between states are robust.

A permutation procedure was employed on the source-reconstructed single-trial data to assess if the observed differences between baseline and hypnosis conditions were statistically significant. To assess statistically significant differences in SCD, a null distribution was obtained by randomly shuffling condition labels (baseline vs. hypnosis condition) 1000 times. This allowed calculation of a null distribution of differences—per source and time point—expected by chance. Spatiotemporal distribution of statistically significant differences in source currents is shown in. Statistically significant differences in SCD are found in.

A similar permutation approach was employed to determine whether the difference in PCI between baseline and hypnosis was statistically significant. This involved shuffling the condition labels, and calculating the binary matrix of source activations and corresponding PCI multiple times, to yield a null distribution to which the observed PCI difference could be compared. This allowed us to assess whether the PCI findings were due to normal individual variation or denoted an actual difference between states. To reduce computational load, source activations were converted to binary form using a procedure (Schartner et al. 2015) that takes less time than the bootstrap procedure (Casali et al. 2013). The threshold used for statistical significance at a given source was calculated as the mean of the absolute values of the analytic signal, as determined by Hilbert transform (Schartner et al. 2015). The PCIs of two surrogate datasets, corresponding to the baseline and hypnosis conditions under the null hypothesis, was then determined. The surrogate datasets were created by randomly shuffling the labels of trials in the original data 1000 times. The observed difference in PCI between surrogate ‘baseline’ and ‘hypnosis’ conditions constitutes the aforementioned null distribution to which the observed difference in PCI between actual baseline and hypnosis conditions can then be compared. This rests on the assumption that PCI, as calculated using the bootstrap procedure (Casali et al. 2013) or thresholding procedure (Schartner et al. 2015) will be essentially the same. shows that this is indeed the case. Additionally, to investigate whether differences in PCI are attributable specifically to perturbation-related effects, or whether they more generally track global features of the state, we ran additional PCI analyses on the pre-pulse time period. Power spectral density was estimated separately for both conditions for each electrode, and differences between the two conditions in frontal and occipital clusters were compared to a null distribution arrived at by shuffling and permuting data from both conditions a 1000 times. For this analysis, the post-pulse activation, the beep, and the corresponding button press response were removed.

The TMS–EEG datasets are available through the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/e2pkt/.


Results

Spectral power differences between the baseline and hypnosis conditions are present most notably at frequencies above the 24 Hz range. Higher frequencies are more pronounced in hypnosis, especially in the occipital region, while in the frontal area hypnosis is characterized by a decrease in the lower frequency range. This shows that spontaneous EEG activity markedly differs between the two conditions. The spatiotemporal dynamics of source-reconstructed, TMS-evoked activation under the baseline condition were in line with previous reports (Garcia et al. 2011); see. TMS first elicited activation around the stimulated area, then spread to the parietal and frontal cortices. TMS during hypnosis first elicited activation in the posterior cortical and parietal areas, around 20 and 50 ms after the TMS pulse; see. Subsequently (150–200 ms), the centroparietal activity elicited by TMS became strongly diminished compared to baseline. Importantly though, TMS-evoked activation persisted longer during hypnosis than baseline (250–300 ms). Although TMS evoked longer-lasting activation, it failed to evoke the strong, coherent activation in the frontoparietal circuits (around 150–200 ms) associated with conscious processing (Dehaene and Changeaux 2011; Koch et al. 2016). Differences in SCD between hypnosis and baseline conditions illustrate this difference when summed over all dipoles. As shown in, there is more deviation in the source activations across trials in the hypnosis condition when compared to the baseline condition (cortical distribution of standard deviations is not presented as this effect did not localize to any specific cortical area). The temporal evolution of the bPL in the hypnosis condition is characterized by a fast first peak at 50 ms, followed by a general decrease compared to baseline. Baseline phase-locking was most prominent in the 100–200 ms timewindow.

As shown in, PCI remained within the normal variation observed in neurologically healthy individuals (Casarotto et al. 2016), but hypnosis was associated with more complex (more highly differentiated) activation patterns compared to baseline wakefulness: i.e. hypnosis significantly increased PCI throughout the TMS-evoked activation period; see. To examine if similar effect could be detected from the spontaneous, not-TMS-evoked variation in EEG we ran similar PCI analysis but restricted it to the pre-TMS time window. As shown in, similar but weakened effect was observed.


Discussion

The results show that hypnosis can be accompanied by significant changes in brain state as measured both by PCI and TMS-evoked activation. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of increased PCI under a non-pathological conscious condition. An increase in magnetoencephalography signal complexity has previously been found using a related non-perturbational measure (Lempel-Ziv complexity) for the neural effects of DMT (Timmermann et al. 2019) ketamine, psilocybin, and LSD (Schartner et al. 2017). This change was accompanied by an increase in the power of higher frequencies under the hypnosis condition.

We propose that the observed change in brain state under hypnosis may be characterized by a shift from the metastable state of normal wakeful consciousness towards more segregated connectivity. We have demonstrated such shift in one participant, but further studies are required to examine how well it generalizes to hypnosis in general. In periods of normal consciousness, the neural activity in a set of cortical regions can transiently lock into a synchronized configuration (Dehaene and Changeaux 2011; Koch et al. 2016) but then flexibly reconfigure itself based on internal and external factors (Kelso 2012; Tognoli and Kelso 2014). In this study, the pattern of transient locking is revealed under baseline by strong and widespread activation in frontoparietal areas 150–200 ms after TMS pulse. In contrast, under hypnosis, this synchronized activity fails to initiate; processing in different cortical areas remains segregated, reflected in higher PCI values. In other words, in a normal waking state, the system can resolve the perturbation by integrating the pulse activity more effectively, whereas under hypnosis the coordination breaks down as the system is less integrated. Across trials, source activity showed more variation in the hypnosis condition already in the pre-pulse timewindow, consistent with the idea of a more segregated state under hypnosis. This difference is most pronounced following the TMS-pulse and again in the 150 ms time window. Differences in phase-locking were observed, strengthening the case for an alteration in the underlying metastable regime (Kitzbichler et al. 2009). Decreased phase-locking, as observed here in the 100–200 ms post-pulse timewindow in the hypnosis condition, is consistent with a decreased inter-area communication in the functional network (Modolo et al. 2020). Taken together, the PCI results and the decreased phase-locking form a consistent view of the brain, and occupying a more segregated state during hypnosis.

The shift from metastable to more segregated state could explain the behavioural and experiential changes accompanying hypnosis. Hypnotic states are behaviourally inflexible; they lack the normal spontaneous adaptive reactivity to internal or external stimuli because the brain’s specialized modules are not able to synchronize communication. Nevertheless, the capacity to react to suggestions is high, indicating a large variety of potential states: i.e. hypnotic suggestion can facilitate configurations not typically present during normal consciousness. Experientially, hypnosis is associated with a narrowed scope of conscious content; the information processed in specialized cortical regions is segregated from the global stream of consciousness (Dehaene and Changeaux 2011).

The analyses of pre- and post-pulse complexity suggest that while PCI calculated following perturbation allows for a faster and arguably more reliable way to assess complexity, the perturbation itself is not necessary for the calculation. There is, however, a higher signal-to-noise ratio in pre-pulse complexity as compared to post-pulse PCI.

Because we applied TMS to occipital cortex, one could argue that the observed difference between hypnosis and baseline conditions reflects the differences in phosphene perception. We did not inform the participant about the possibility of phosphenes before the experiment, because attending to phosphenes is known to increases the chances of perceiving them (Bestmann et al. 2007). After the experiment, the participant did not report perceiving phosphenes when queried.


Considerations on the Single Subject Design

While the single-subject design poses problems for generalizability, we consider it to be well suited for this particular question. The history of neurosciences and psychology showcase several areas where single cases have proven invaluable for scientific understanding and advancement, an approach that has recently been suggested as an invaluable addition to the neuropsychology research design toolkit (Cubelli and Della Sala 2017). Crucial advances have been made possible by studying, e.g. cases such as Phineas Gage (Harlow 1848), patient H.M. (Scoville and Milner 1957), or Leborgne (Broca 1861). These studies have opened new hypotheses and theories for further investigation to be carried out in a broader sample with more variation. Here, we have demonstrated the changes in neural dynamics in what is undeniably an exemplar of a hypnotic individual. But we do not wish to imply that the current case would be a prototypical case of hypnosis. Quite the contrary, hypnosis is not necessarily a uniform phenomenon, but one that may include various different exemplars. Neutral hypnosis can—at least in this subject—substantially change the dynamical state of the brain, but it does not necessarily follow that similar alterations accompany every subject or hypnotic experience. This is a question for future research. Given that there is inter-individual variation in both normal waking PCI and suggestibility, a repeatable involuntary neural alteration within one person allows new considerations for empirical research in more varied settings.

Related to the debate on whether hypnosis occupies a distinct state of consciousness or lies on a socio-cognitive continuum, we can say that neutral hypnosis at the very least can cause a response in brain dynamics that clearly differs from the response in relaxed non-hypnotic brain configuration. Whether this qualifies as an altered state or not seems to be a merely semantics, and dependent on the exact way the contentious term ‘altered state’ is defined. Our results, which focus on neural state changes, obviously do not refute other approaches to hypnosis, such as the socio-cultural model. We see no discrepancy in hypnosis resulting in, both, an altered brain state, as well as being mediated by socio-cognitive factors or expectations.

Finally, we want to comment on why we did not include in this study a control group. In many studies on hypnotic participants, the results are compared to a group of participants who aim to ‘simulate’, e.g. the outcome of the hypnotic suggestion (e.g. Scheibe et al. 1968; Franz et al. 2020). We think this approach has merits, but it would not have worked in this study. First, what would have been the exact instruction for simulators? To relax, to concentrate, to meditate, to focus on a specific mental image, or just to generally ‘fake being hypnotized’? It seems that if we were to find a difference given a specific control condition one could always argue that it was not the ‘correct’ control condition. The control condition is easier to find in task-specific hypnosis. Second, the between-subjects comparison would be beside our point: What we wish to show is that a one-word hypnotic induction by itself can at least in one participant induce large scale changes in brain dynamics. Given that this participant has previously in well-documented research provided demonstrations in phenomena best characterized as hypnosis (including studies which employ control groups; see e.g. Kallio and Koivisto 2016), we feel confident in arguing that the phenomena we can here observe in the brain level is what is commonly termed as neutral hypnosis. For instance, a control group was unable to simulate changes in her volitional and involuntary eye movements (optokinetic reflex, the pupillary reflex, and programming a saccade to a single target) following a hypnotic induction (Kallio et al. 2011). Similarly, in a study by Kallio et al. (2017) TS-H was compared to a control group in a hypnotically induced altered colour perception task. She outperformed control group participants who were explicitly instructed to simulate the task using various cognitive strategies. This together with previous EEG findings of an arguably preconscious (70–120 ms after stimulus onset) ERP response following a suggested colour perception alteration (Koivisto et al. 2013) reduces the likelihood of her simulating the hypnotic responses, but of course such possibility cannot be ruled out in entirety. While people inhabiting other positions on the hypnotizibility continuum may or may not rely on similar changes in brain dynamics, here at least we have a person whose hypnotic responses seem contingent to such changes.

We acknowledge that the possibility that the participant was merely behaviourally faking hypnosis, and concurrently wilfully modulating her brain activity, cannot be ruled out. While PCI is arguably less susceptible to voluntary influences that more standard brain imaging approaches, the question of whether PCI can be modulated voluntarily (e.g. through meditation or via other cognitive manipulation) remains open. We welcome research into the effects of more nuanced manipulations—such as meditation, attention, and cognitive task load—on PCI, to better understand the implication of the present results. One should be mindful of the limitations of this single study on drawing too general explanations of hypnosis in general. Cumulative evidence from replications and varied research designs will allow for more certainty upon which to understand the brain changes accompanying hypnosis.

More broadly, we hope our results will spawn new research programmes and further theoretical advancements for the study of hypnosis. For example, the formulation of the possible mechanisms in terms of metastability alterations and point towards specific methodologies within functional magnetic resonance imaging, or towards magnetoencephalography for questions to do with more intricate dynamic behaviour. Theoretically, we could then move towards mechanisms, by, e.g. combining the way this state-specific change in the dynamics can moderate top-down predictions. Furthermore, a question remains of whether the segregation observed here is introduced gradually or whether it is introduced by a punctuated shift given a certain threshold. As such our research invites a future study on people occupying various positions on the suggestibility spectrum. Such a study would simultaneously function as a replication for this finding, and possibly resolve the problem of generalizability inherent in single-subject studies.


Contributor Information

Jarno Tuominen, Department of Psychology and Speech-Language Pathology, Assistentinkatu 7, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku Brain and Mind Center, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Sakari Kallio, Department of Psychology and Speech-Language Pathology, Assistentinkatu 7, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; School of Biosciences, Högskolevägen 3, 54128 University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.

Valtteri Kaasinen, Turku Brain and Mind Center, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Division of Clinical Neurosciences, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku University Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521 Turku, Finland.

Henry Railo, Department of Psychology and Speech-Language Pathology, Assistentinkatu 7, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku Brain and Mind Center, 20014 University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku University Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521 Turku, Finland; Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University of Turku, P.O. Box 52, 20521 Turku, Finland.


Effects of ketamine on brain function during metacognition of episodic memory

Mirko Lehmann, Claudia Neumann, Sven Wasserthal, Johannes Schultz, Achilles Delis, Peter Trautner, René Hurlemann, Ulrich Ettinger — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC7959215, CC BY 4.0.

Only little research has been conducted on the pharmacological underpinnings of metacognition. Here, we tested the modulatory effects of a single intravenous dose (100 ng/ml) of the N-methyl-D-aspartate-glutamate-receptor antagonist ketamine, a compound known to induce altered states of consciousness, on metacognition and its neural correlates. Fifty-three young, healthy adults completed two study phases of an episodic memory task involving both encoding and retrieval in a double-blind, placebo-controlled fMRI study. Trial-by-trial confidence ratings were collected during retrieval. Effects on the subjective state of consciousness were assessed using the 5D-ASC questionnaire. Confirming that the drug elicited a psychedelic state, there were effects of ketamine on all 5D-ASC scales. Acute ketamine administration during retrieval had deleterious effects on metacognitive sensitivity (meta-d′) and led to larger metacognitive bias, with retrieval performance (d′) and reaction times remaining unaffected. However, there was no ketamine effect on metacognitive efficiency (meta-d′/d′). Measures of the BOLD signal revealed that ketamine compared to placebo elicited higher activation of posterior cortical brain areas, including superior and inferior parietal lobe, calcarine gyrus, and lingual gyrus, albeit not specific to metacognitive confidence ratings. Ketamine administered during encoding did not significantly affect performance or brain activation. Overall, our findings suggest that ketamine impacts metacognition, leading to significantly larger metacognitive bias and deterioration of metacognitive sensitivity as well as unspecific activation increases in posterior hot zone areas of the neural correlates of consciousness.

Keywords: metacognition, confidence, ketamine, episodic memory, glutamate


Introduction

Many of our thoughts in everyday life revolve around other thoughts, about something we said or a decision we made. It has been postulated that these meta-thoughts constitute a distinct feature of consciousness. According to Block (1995), consciousness can be divided into phenomenal consciousness, access consciousness, self-consciousness, and monitoring consciousness. The latter concerns metacognition, i.e., the ability to reflect upon our own thoughts and knowledge and to monitor the quality of ongoing cognitive or perceptual processes (Grimaldi et al. 2015). The link between metacognition and consciousness is based on the intuition that, if an individual is unable to reflect on a particular mental state, this state cannot be conscious and consequently, some kind of metacognition should accompany all conscious representations (Shea and Frith 2019).

Metacognition is frequently measured on a trial-by-trial-basis as participants indicate their level of confidence about the accuracy of a perceptual or mnestic judgment (Grimaldi et al. 2015). A second-order confidence rating (Type 2 response) is therefore based on a first-order judgment (Type 1 response). Measures of metacognitive sensitivity tap how well participants introspectively assess or monitor their own cognitive processes (Fleming and Lau 2014). By applying signal-detection-theory (SDT) methodology, metacognitive sensitivity (as meta-d′) can be quantified independently of interindividual differences in response tendencies (Maniscalco and Lau 2012). The meta-d′-framework also allows to control for the influence of primary task performance on metacognitive sensitivity (Maniscalco and Lau 2014): metacognitive efficiency (meta-d′/d′) represents the amount of signal strength available for the metacognitive process, expressed as a fraction of the amount of signal strength available for the Type 1 task (McCurdy et al. 2013). Finally, it is important to consider the general tendency for higher or lower confidence ratings, the so-called metacognitive bias (Fleming and Lau 2014).

But what is the neural basis of metacognition? By drawing on evidence from no-report paradigms, Koch et al. (2016) argue that the neural correlates of consciousness are primarily localized in a posterior cortical network labeled a “hot zone” for conscious functions. However, neuroimaging and lesion studies suggest that higher-order conscious functions such as metacognition may also engage a frontoparietal network (Rouault et al. 2018; Vaccaro and Fleming 2018).

A more complete understanding of the neural mechanisms of metacognition also requires insight into the underlying neurotransmitter systems. To date, very little is known about the pharmacology of metacognition. Recently, Hauser et al. (2017) revealed that blockade of noradrenaline led to increased metacognitive sensitivity with unchanged perceptual decision-making performance, whereas both perceptual discrimination and metacognition remained unaffected by dopamine blockade.

One neurotransmitter likely to mediate aspects of consciousness is the glutamatergic system. Antagonists at the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor, such as phencyclidine or ketamine, provoke psychedelic states which are clearly distinct from a normal waking state of consciousness (Anis et al. 1983; Umbricht et al. 2002; Morris and Wallach 2014), characterized by dissociative experiencing including vigilance reduction, ego transcendence, disembodiment, and visual and sensory disturbances (Vlisides et al. 2018). The noncompetitive NMDA-receptor antagonist ketamine is dose-dependently used for the treatment of depression (Murrough et al. 2013) and general anesthesia (Kurdi et al. 2014; Sarasso et al. 2015); in addition, it is a well-established research tool with an excellent safety record in both clinical and experimental applications (Javitt et al. 2012; Doyle et al. 2013). Ketamine-induced psychotropic effects such as distorted sense of space and time, euphoria and out-of-body experiences have contributed to its abuse as a recreational drug (Schifano et al. 2008; Giorgetti et al. 2015). Based on findings that acute ketamine administration temporarily and reversibly induces a range of both positive (hallucinations, thought disorder, delusions) and negative (social withdrawal, emotional blunting) psychosis-like symptoms in otherwise healthy volunteers, the compound is also a widely used pharmacological model of schizophrenia (Krystal et al. 1994; Malhotra et al. 1996).

Ketamine effects on cognition include a selective degradation of episodic memory (Hetem et al. 2000; Morgan et al. 2004). In episodic memory tasks, participants typically encode word items, and later retrieve those items by writing down as many words as they can remember (recall) or indicate whether a given item had previously been encoded or not (recognition) (Honey et al. 2005b). Previous findings suggest that retrieval performance is disturbed when ketamine is administered during encoding but remains unimpaired when only recognition, but not encoding, takes place under the influence of ketamine (Oye et al. 1992; Hetem et al. 2000; Honey et al. 2005b). This effect may, however, also depend on the depth of semantic processing of the encoded items: Honey et al. (2005b) found that ketamine reduced retrieval performance only when items were encoded at an intermediate level of processing (LoP), not on deep or shallow levels. A functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study by Honey et al. (2005a) reported that ketamine affects brain function during retrieval even if encoding occurred prior to ketamine administration: ketamine was associated with attenuated left prefrontal cortical response to deeply encoded items, whereas anterior cingulate activation was reduced for incorrect compared to correct responses.

Even though growing research effort is directed towards identifying the neural underpinnings of metacognition, and previous studies have aimed at specifying the role of glutamate in various cognitive functions, the involvement of this neurotransmitter system in metacognition has not yet been examined. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled fMRI study, the primary aim was to investigate the role of the glutamate system in metacognition and its underlying neural activity by applying a psychotomimetic dose of ketamine. Confidence ratings were collected in an episodic memory framework, based on the dissociation of ketamine effects on encoding and retrieval as operationalized by Honey et al. (2005a).

Specifically, we applied a task in which differences in Type 2 responses should not be due to altered Type 1 performance, since ketamine was previously shown to leave episodic memory performance in deep and shallow encoding conditions unaffected (Honey et al. 2005b). Metacognitive sensitivity was quantified using the meta-d′-framework, which was previously shown to be sensitive to the effects of pharmacological challenges (Clos et al. 2019) and drug consumption (Sadeghi et al. 2017). We expected metacognitive sensitivity to be altered by ketamine in both study phases and further predicted ketamine to affect neural activity during both metacognitive confidence ratings and encoding. The secondary study aims included investigation of LoP effects on retrieval performance and metacognitive accuracy as well as confirmation of the subjective, phenomenological effects of ketamine by including a self-report measure of altered states of consciousness.


Materials and Methods


Participants

Fifty-three healthy, non-smoking, right-handed volunteers (aged 18–34, M = 23.47, SD = 3.24; 29 female) with normal or corrected to normal vision and native speaker level command of German language were recruited for this study. Exclusion criteria were as follows: prior experience with ketamine, history of psychiatric or neurological disorder, claustrophobia, metalliferous implants, pregnancy, positive drug test, under- or overweight (Body Mass Index: <17; ≥30), or consumption of any medication. Further medical contraindications for the administration of ketamine included hypertension and hyperthyroidism.

The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee at the Department of Psychology, University of Bonn (approval number: 18-03-28). In accordance with this approval, data of the study are not stored on public repositories, but behavioral data are available as, and fMRI data will be made available upon request. Materials, analysis scripts, and preregistration of the study are available in Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/numxs/).


Screening procedure

An online prescreening interview was conducted with individuals who responded to study advertisements. Those who met all inclusion criteria were invited for a screening visit in the laboratory, where the German version of the 5.0.0 MINI-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (Ackenheil et al. 1999), a urine drug screen (Drug-Screen Multi-5T, nal von minden GmbH) and, for females, a pregnancy test (NADAL hCG Pregnancy Test, nal von minden GmbH) were carried out to screen for exclusion criteria of psychiatric illness, drug abuse, and pregnancy. Measurements of height, bodyweight, and blood pressure were obtained. A medical questionnaire was used to exclude any current or past medical conditions, or any diagnosis of psychotic disorders among first-degree relatives. Additionally, the first five questions of the Structured Instrument for Prodromal Syndromes (SIPS 5.0) were included to rule out prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia (McGlashan et al. 2001). Suitable individuals were invited for assessment visits.


Study design

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled between-subjects design was employed. Randomization lists were created independently for females and males. The study team carrying out the assessments was not involved in the process of randomization. An unblinded study anesthesiologist prepared the infusion solution and constantly monitored oxygen saturation and heart rate of the participants during the infusion. Twenty-four participants were administered a subanesthetic dose of racemic ketamine (Ketamin-Ratiopharm 500 injection solution, Ratiopharm, Ulm, Germany), 29 participants received a saline solution (0.9% sodium chloride).

Ketamine was administered as a 2 mg/ml solution with a constant target plasma level of 100 ng/ml by a bolus and continuous infusion using a computerized infusion pump (Graseby 3500, Smith Medical Int. Ltd, Luton, UK). The solutions were administered using the STANPUMP program (Steven Shafer, M.D., Anesthesiology Service, PAVAMC 3801 Miranda Ave., Palo Alto, USA) based on the three-compartment model described by Domino et al. (1982). Previous studies of our group (Steffens et al. 2016) using the same infusion equipment and procedure confirmed that ketamine concentrations were close to the targeted plasma level and no residual traces of ketamine solution from the infusion site contaminated the results; therefore, no blood samples were drawn in this study.


General procedure

On assessment days, participants were required to refrain from solid food for 6 h and clear fluids for 2 h before the infusion. Within 24 h before, participants were also instructed to take no medication and to stay abstinent from alcohol. Female participants took another pregnancy test on the day of assessment. After participants arrived, they completed the first study task (see below) before an additional medical screening was performed by the study anesthesiologist. Participants were then fitted with intravenous access into the nondominant arm and positioned in the MRI scanner. Following an individual adjustment of the field of view and an initial high-resolution structural imaging scan, the infusion was started.

Ketamine effects on metacognition, encoding, and retrieval in an episodic memory task were assessed in two separate study-test phases. Stimuli were selected from the Berlin Affective Word List (Võ et al. 2009); word class, frequency, emotionality, arousal level, number of syllables, and vividness were counterbalanced between conditions.

In Study Phase I, items were presented on a computer screen outside the MRI scanner, prior to drug infusion. Retrieval was tested ∼60 min after the end of the first encoding task, while BOLD data were acquired during infusion. In this first retrieval task, participants responded to stimuli by categorizing them either as “old items”, if they had previously been presented in the encoding task, or “new items”, if they had not been presented, and afterwards reported their metacognitive confidence (Type 2 response). Subsequently, in Study Phase II, another word list consisting entirely of novel items was encoded, as participants were still undergoing infusion in the MRI scanner. Retrieval of these items was tested ∼60 min after the infusion was terminated and participants had left the scanner. Immediately upon leaving the scanner, participants completed the 5D-ASC questionnaire to assess altered states of consciousness (Dittrich 1998). In the second retrieval task, items encoded in the second encoding task (“old items”) were again presented on a computer screen alongside “new items”, again requiring participants to state their confidence after each Type 1 response. provides an overview of the general procedure of assessment days.


Task design


Study Phase I

Participants were presented with a total of 120 word items displayed in the center of a computer screen and were instructed to make one of two types of judgments about these items, which served as a manipulation of the depth of processing. We aimed for two levels of processing (deep/shallow) and selected a manipulation that could be expected to yield a pronounced LoP effect (Honey et al. 2005b). For each of 60 word items, participants indicated their subjective judgment of the pleasantness (pleasant/unpleasant) of the word (leading to deep encoding), whereas the other 60 items were encoded in a shallow manner, by participants reporting the number of syllables of each word (even/odd). Participants were not told that the retrieval of these items would be tested afterwards. These encoding tasks alternated blockwise, with each of four blocks comprising 30 items; the starting condition was determined randomly. Items were presented until keypress for a maximum of 3 s, with an interstimulus interval (ISI) of 0.5 s.

The fMRI retrieval task was implemented in an event-related design. Participants responded to items presented on the center of a monitor behind the MRI scanner via a mirror by predefined button presses. A total of 180 word items were used, including the 120 items that had been encoded in the previous task as well as 60 new items. The 2:1 ratio of old to new items was based on previous studies (Honey et al. 2005a). Items were presented in randomized order for a duration of 2.5 s followed by an ISI that varied randomly between 2 s and 6 s; participants were instructed to respond to items which they considered to be old, i.e., having previously been presented, with a left index finger button press and to items which they labeled as new with a right index finger button press.

There were two types of second-order ratings: subsequent to 120 of these Type 1 responses, participants rated their subjective confidence regarding the judgment on a 6-point Likert scale (1 = “not confident at all”, 6 = “very confident”). In this “Report” condition, designed to tap metacognitive processes, participants moved a cursor along the scale, using their index fingers, until they reached the position on the scale that most accurately matched their subjective confidence, which they were instructed to confirm by a left or right thumb press. During the 60 “Follow” trials which served as a control condition not involving the actual process of confidence formation (Yokoyama et al. 2010; Fleming et al. 2012), participants were instructed to navigate the cursor towards a predefined number on the scale, highlighted in blue. The initial position of the cursor was random in each condition; there were no written labels to either point of the scale to avoid extreme responding bias (Overgaard et al. 2006). “Report” and “Follow” trials alternated in randomized order; exactly two-third of each of the episodic memory condition trials (deep/shallow/new) were followed by the “Report” condition. The duration of the decision window for this second-order response was 3.5 s, followed by a 0.5 s screen where a change in cursor color from white to red highlighted the participant’s response. Another variable ISI (2–6 s) preceded the onset of the next trial. In order to minimize exhaustion, the experiment was paused halfway through the task and a separate scan was started for the second half of the experiment. provides an illustration of the task.


Study Phase II

Following the completion of this first retrieval task, participants remained in the scanner and performed a second encoding task. Here, they were presented 100 novel word items in a block design; again, 50% of the items were encoded deeply by rating the subjective pleasantness of each word, whereas 50% of the items were encoded in a shallow manner by reporting the number of syllables. Again, encoding tasks alternated blockwise, with 10 blocks each comprising 10 items. At the beginning of each block, an instruction about the upcoming task was shown for 2 s. Participants responded via left or right button presses within a 3 s window (ISI = 0.5 s) for each item.

After termination of infusion and leaving the scanner, participants filled in the 5D-ASC, marking their extent of agreement with statements regarding various phenomenal experiences (Dittrich 1998). The 5D-ASC is a self-report questionnaire to retrospectively assess five dimensions of altered states of consciousness. These include three primary, etiology-independent scales, “Oceanic Boundlessness”, “Dread of Ego Dissolution”, and “Visionary Restructuralization”, which can be conflated to a global measure of altered consciousness, and two secondary, etiology-specific scales comprising further aspects of altered experiences, “Auditory Alterations” and “Vigilance Reduction”. 5D-ASC scale scores were formed following guidelines by Dittrich et al. (2006).

One hour after completion of the second encoding task, retrieval of those items was tested in a second retrieval task, without infusion at a time when plasma levels of ketamine are significantly reduced (Honey et al. 2005b). The design of the second retrieval task was almost identical to the first one, with two exceptions: ISI was constant (1 s), and there was no “Follow” condition, so participants had to report their confidence on each of the 150 trials (100 old, 50 new).


fMRI data acquisition and analysis

Imaging was conducted using a 1.5 T Avanto MRI scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). High-resolution structural images were acquired to optimize normalization of functional imaging data using a T1-weighted 3D MPRAGE sequence [Repetition time (TR) = 1660 ms, echo time (TE) = 3.09, inversion time = 800 ms, matrix size = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, FoV = 256 mm, flip angle = 15°, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm2, 160 sagittal slices]. Task-related BOLD fMRI data were acquired using a T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence (TR = 2500 ms; TE = 45 ms, matrix size = 64 × 64, slice thickness = 3.0 mm, FoV = 192 mm, flip angle = 90°, voxel size = 3 × 3 × 3 mm, 31 slices). A standard 12-channel head coil was used for radio frequency transmission and reception.

fMRI data were analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 software (Wellcome Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) implemented in Matlab R2014a (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, USA). To allow for T1 equilibration, the first five volumes of each functional time series were discarded. Each participant’s structural image was segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cerebro-spinal fluid using a forward deformation field to map it onto template tissue probability maps (Ashburner and Friston 2005). Functional images were realigned to the first image of each time series to correct for head movement, using a six-parameter rigid body transformation. The realigned functional images were then coregistered to the anatomical image. For spatial normalization, functional scans were transformed into standard stereotaxic space of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template (Evans et al. 1992; Holmes et al. 1998) and resampled at 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxel size. Finally, images were spatially smoothed using an 8 mm full-width-at-half-maximum Gaussian kernel.

Following pre-processing, at the first (single-subject) level for Study Phase I, the onset of each stimulus was defined as the onset of the event; for Type 1 responses, the duration was set to be the reaction time from stimulus presentation to button press. For second-order responses, the function spanned the time from onset of scale presentation to the first movement participants made on the scale. This was done as the decisive metacognitive processes during Report trials were expected to take place during that time, and to eliminate motion-related activation. The realignment parameters were added to the model as covariates of no interest. Correctly retrieved deep, shallow and new items were included as Type 1 regressors; since there were too few cases of incorrect answers in the majority of participants, an overall residual regressor of no interest was formed for incorrect answers, thereby departing from our preregistered analysis plan.

Overall, there were four Type 1 regressors: “Deep” (mean number of trials across participants: 49, SD = 8.6); “Shallow” (M = 27.19, SD = 11.34); “New” (M = 47.02, SD = 11.65); and “Incorrect” (M = 41.85, SD = 9.33). For each of these four regressors, two separate regressors were included for second-order ratings, resulting in a total of eight second-order regressors: “DeepReport” (M = 29.92, SD = 8.05); “DeepFollow” (M = 17.68, SD = 7.58); “ShallowReport” (M = 18.96, SD = 8.95); “ShallowFollow” (M = 7.53, SD = 4.7); “NewReport” (M = 26.72, SD = 6.69); “NewFollow” (M = 13.17, SD = 3.53); “IncorrectReport” (M = 31.02, SD = 9.04); “IncorrectFollow” (M = 13.94, SD = 5.03). All contrasts were estimated by comparing specific effects against the baseline of the respective first-level-model; consequently, the two separate runs were conflated in this step. Additionally, we set up an exploratory first-level-model, in which “Report” regressors were parametrically modulated by the selected confidence rating in each trial, all other regressors remaining unmodified, as only “Report” ratings were expected to require the engagement of metacognitive Type 2 evaluations.

For Study Phase II, the function spanned the time from onset of word presentation to button press. Here, a simpler model with conditions “Deep” and “Shallow” was specified. Also departing from preregistration, the factor “Retrieval Performance” (later correctly/incorrectly retrieved) could not be applied, as there was an insufficient amount of incorrect answers.

On the second level, a full factorial analysis was carried out on Study Phase I data using between-subjects factor “Drug” (ketamine/placebo) and within-subjects factor “Word Type” (deep/shallow/new) for Type 1 contrasts with an additional within-subjects-factor “Rating Type” (report/follow) for second-order contrasts. A separate full factorial analysis was conducted on Study Phase II data, using between-subjects-factor “Drug” (ketamine/placebo) and within-subjects-factor “Encoding Level” (deep/shallow).

All second-level analyses were conducted at the whole-brain-level. The statistical height threshold was P < 0.001, and significant clusters were inferred if the peak voxel of the cluster survived a statistical threshold of P < 0.05 family-wise-error (FWE) corrected (cluster-level). In order to assign anatomical labels, the anatomy toolbox was utilized (Eickhoff et al. 2005). To determine whether significant clusters of each contrast represented activations or deactivations, mean summary functions were created using MarsBaR (https://sourceforge.net/projects/marsbar).

BOLD data of four participants during Study Phase I and of three participants during Study Phase II had to be excluded from fMRI analysis because normalization failed. Consequently, fMRI data analysis was performed on 49 participants (23 ketamine, 26 placebo) for Study Phase I and on 50 participants (23 ketamine, 27 placebo) for Study Phase II. Behavioral data analysis was carried out on all 53 participants who completed the assessment.


Behavioral data analysis

Following our preregistration, Type 1 (retrieval) and Type 2 (metacognitive) performance was assessed in an SDT framework (Green and Swets 1966; Barrett et al. 2013). We applied meta-d′ analysis (Maniscalco and Lau 2012) to quantify metacognitive sensitivity—i.e., the individual ability to discriminate between correct and incorrect retrieval judgments. Meta-d′ represents a response-bias free measure of how well confidence ratings track task accuracy and is on the same scale as the Type 1 sensitivity measure d′ (Maniscalco and Lau 2014). Meta-d′ was estimated in a maximum-likelihood-estimation model using code by Maniscalco (http://www.columbia.edu/~bsm2105/type2sdt) in Matlab R2016a (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, USA); only “Report” trials in which participants provided button presses on both retrieval and confidence rating were used for calculation. Additionally, metacognitive efficiency was calculated by dividing meta-d′ by d′ to provide an index of Type 2 performance that takes into account differences in Type 1 performance (Fleming and Lau 2014). To evaluate Type 2 performance, we therefore considered both absolute Type 2 sensitivity (meta-d′) and Type 2 efficiency relative to Type 1 performance (meta-d′/d′).

In addition to our preregistered analyses, we also conducted various exploratory analyses to facilitate mechanistic understanding of the outcomes. For example, we decided to expand our analysis to investigate ketamine effects on performance-corrected metacognitive bias (quantified as mean judgment minus mean performance) to test for differences in the selected confidence ratings between the two groups while controlling for the confounding influence of performance on confidence levels (Fleming and Lau 2014). Moreover, we explored Pearson’s correlations between Type 1 and both Type 2 performance measures as well as metacognitive bias in both study phases with the 5D-ASC global measure of altered consciousness; alpha-level was Bonferroni-corrected (α=.05/8=.006). Finally, we applied an extension of the HMeta-d toolbox (Fleming 2017), a hierarchical Bayesian estimation of metacognitive efficiency (https://github.com/metacoglab/HMeta-d) in Matlab R2016a, which estimates group-level parameters over log(meta-d′/d′) while taking into account uncertainty in model fits at the single-subject level. To test for a true group difference in metacognitive efficiency, we fitted separate models for the ketamine and placebo group and calculated the 95% highest-density intervals (HDIs; the interval containing 95% of the Markov chain Monte Carlo posterior samples) on the difference between the group posterior densities and evaluated their potential overlaps with zero (Kruschke 2014). We ran three chains for estimation and ensured chain convergence (Fleming 2017).

All other behavioral data analyses were conducted using SPSS 22 (IBM Corp., Armonk, USA). Data were tested for violation of statistical assumptions; Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests were applied to test for normality of distribution, Mauchly’s tests checked for sphericity, Levene’s statistics tested for homogeneity of variances and Box-M-tests for homogeneity of covariances. When normality was violated in only one variable of a group, none of the variables were transformed. Drug effects on 5D-ASC scales, Type 1 and Type 2 reaction times and metacognitive bias were tested via independent samples t-tests. Paired t-tests were employed to compare Type 1 and Type 2 reaction times and metacognitive bias between deeply vs. shallowly encoded items. Separate mixed-design ANOVAs were employed with factors “Encoding Level” and the “Drug” for Type 1 and Type 2 sensitivity and Type 2 efficiency. Effect sizes for t-tests are given in Cohen’s d (Cohen and Maydeu-Olivares 1992), effect sizes for ANOVAs in partial eta-squared (Cohen 1973).


Results


5D-ASC

There was a significant ketamine effect on the 5D-ASC global measure of altered consciousness [t(23.7) = 4.69, P < 0.001, d = 1.35] and on all scales. Participants who had received ketamine scored significantly higher on the three primary dimensions “Oceanic Boundlessness” [t(23.23) = 4.04, P < 0.001, d = 1.17], “Dread of Ego Dissolution” [t(25.73) = 4.56, P < 0.001, d = 1.31], and “Visionary Restructuralization” [t(23.43) = 3.48, P = 0.002, d = 1.01]. They also achieved significantly higher values on the “Auditory Alterations” [t(28.17) = 4.55, P < 0.001, d = 1.29] and “Vigilance Reduction” scales [t(34.01) = 5.99, P < 0.001, d = 1.69]. Descriptive statistics are provided in.


Exploratory analyses

There were no significant correlations of the 5D-ASC global measure of altered consciousness with Type 1 and Type 2 outcomes in either study phase (all P > 0.006).


Study Phase I

Descriptive statistics of Type 1 and Type 2 measures for Study Phase I are provided in. Distribution plots of raw data for all relevant dependent variables can be found in the.


Type 1 behavioral analyses

The LoP manipulation was successful: participants showed significantly enhanced retrieval performance for deeply compared to shallowly encoded items [main effect of “Encoding Level”: F(1,51) = 241.44, P < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.83]. However, there was no main effect of “Drug” [F(1,51) = 1.78, P = 0.188, ηp2 = 0.03]; ketamine did not significantly alter retrieval performance. Type 1 reaction times were significantly shorter for deeply than shallowly encoded items [t(52) = 9.17, P < 0.001, d = 0.71] but were unaffected by ketamine [t(51) = 0.04, P = 0.972, d < 0.01]. There were no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Type 1 fMRI analyses

For BOLD data during retrieval, there was no significant difference between ketamine and placebo (P > 0.05). For a detailed summary of LoP and Old vs. New effects, see.


Type 2 behavioral analyses

Participants showed enhanced metacognitive sensitivity for deeply compared to shallowly encoded items [F(1,51) = 186.36, P < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.79]. Importantly, there was a significant main effect of “Drug” [F(1,51) = 4.64, P = 0.036, ηp2 = 0.08]: metacognitive sensitivity deteriorated under ketamine. However, there was no significant main effect of either “Drug” [F(1,50) = 1.03, P = 0.315, ηp2 = 0.02) or “Encoding Level” [F(1,50) = 2.17, P = 0.147, ηp2 = 0.04] on metacognitive efficiency. Type 2 reaction times were faster for deeply encoded items [t(52) = 4.25, P < 0.001, d = 0.41] but were found to be unaltered by “Drug” [t(51) = 0.03, P = 0.98, d < 0.01]. There were no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Exploratory analyses

Hierarchical Bayesian estimation of group-level meta-d′/d′ confirmed that we cannot be certain that there is a true difference in metacognitive efficiency between the two groups, even though the estimated difference between groups was relatively high [mean: 0.23 (highest-density interval: −0.04 to 0.58)]. provides an illustration of the estimated group-level parameters of metacognitive efficiency.

There was also a significant effect of “Drug” on metacognitive bias scores [t(51) = 2.15, P = 0.037, d = 0.59), with participants under ketamine being overconfident. In addition, there was a significant effect of “Encoding Level” on metacognitive bias, with ratings for shallowly encoded items reflecting overconfidence [t(48) = 7.25, P < 0.001, d = 1.24].


Second-order fMRI analyses


Report vs. follow effects

Higher BOLD responses during Report than Follow were found in a right visual cluster of right calcarine and lingual gyrus. The cluster furthermore encompassed left and right cuneus, as well as bilateral superior occipital gyrus. A second, left-hemispheric, cluster was located in the posterior medial frontal cortex (pMFC).

The reverse effect (Follow>Report, indicating BOLD responses that were higher when participants had to select a predefined specification on the scale) revealed a total of 11 clusters. These correspond to the default-mode network (DMN) that is active in the absence of task demands (Andrews-Hanna 2012), which encompasses angular gyrus, precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), superior frontal areas, and parahippocampal gyrus, all of which were activated in the contrast.


Drug effects

During second-order ratings (both Report and Follow), there was larger BOLD with ketamine than placebo in five clusters: The first, right-hemispheric, cluster included superior parietal lobule (SPL), supramarginal gyrus, inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and angular gyrus. A second cluster was located in left calcarine gyrus, a third cluster in right lingual gyrus. The fourth cluster included left IPL, whereas a fifth, left-hemispheric cluster encompassed lingual gyrus and fusiform gyrus. There were no significant effects for the reverse contrast and no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Exploratory analyses

Parametric modulation analysis (“Report” trials parametrically modulated by the selected confidence rating) revealed very similar results, i.e., higher BOLD response for ketamine than placebo in bilateral lingual, fusiform, and calcarine gyrus and right SPL. There were no significant effects for the reverse contrast and no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Study Phase II


Encoding: fMRI analyses

There were no significant ketamine effects on BOLD during encoding (P > 0.05). For LoP effects, see.


Type 1 behavioral analyses

Descriptive statistics of Type 1 and Type 2 measures for Study Phase II are provided in. Distribution plots of raw data for all relevant dependent variables can be found in the.

Items that had been encoded deeply were recognized more often than shallowly encoded items [significant main effect of “Encoding Level”: F(1,51) = 273.94, P < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.85]. There was no significant effect of “Drug” on d′ [F(1,51) = 1.8, P = 0.185, ηp2 = 0.04]. “Drug” also had no effect on Type 1 reaction times [t(51) = 1.29, P = 0.203, d = 0.36]; when deeply encoded items were presented, participants made significantly quicker button presses [t(52) = 5.7, P < 0.001, d = 0.4]. There were no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Type 2 behavioral analyses

There were significant main effects of “Encoding Level” on metacognitive sensitivity [F(1,50) = 263.38, P < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.84] and metacognitive efficiency [F(1,49) = 18.01, P < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.27), but no effects of “Drug” on either meta-d′ [F(1,50) = 0.655, P = 0.422, ηp2 = 0.01] or metacognitive efficiency [F(1,49) = 0.16, P = 0.691, ηp2 < 0.01]. Type 2 reaction times were also significantly shorter for deeply encoded items [t(51) = 2.68, P = 0.01, d = 0.19], but there was no effect of “Drug” [t(50) = 1.13, P = 0.264, d = 0.34). There were no significant interactions (P > 0.05).


Exploratory analyses

Corresponding to overlaps of 95% HDIs with zero, we found no significant group difference in metacognitive efficiency between ketamine and placebo [0.03 (−0.35 to 0.043)]. Thus, there was no significant ketamine effect on any measure of Type 2 performance when retrieval took place after termination of the infusion. We did, however, observe a significant effect of “Drug” on metacognitive bias [t(50) = 2.75, P = 0.008, d = 0.76], with participants under ketamine displaying overconfidence. There was also significantly larger metacognitive bias for shallowly than for deeply encoded words [t(50) = 9.31, P <.001, d = 1.33].


Discussion

This study investigated the role of the glutamate system in metacognition and associated brain activity using a ketamine challenge during episodic memory tasks in two study phases.


Study Phase I


Task effects

For a detailed discussion on LoP effects both at the behavioral and the brain functional level, see.

Two clusters were significantly more active during Report than Follow; the first includes right calcarine gyrus, bilateral cuneus, and right lingual gyrus. The latter structure has been demonstrated to display increased functional connectivity with prefrontal cortex (PFC) in Report compared to Follow trials (Fleming et al. 2012). The second cluster in left pMFC provides further evidence for its role in metacognition and resembles the anatomically adjacent dorsal anterior cingulate cortex cluster which Fleming et al. (2012) found to be involved in reporting confidence in a similar task design. A recent meta-analysis (Vaccaro and Fleming 2018) identified bilateral pMFC as one of the prime neural correlates of metacognitive judgments, representing the biggest cluster in the composite meta-analysis of all metacognition-related activity and the second-biggest cluster associated with metacognitive ratings following memory judgments.

In the reverse contrast (Follow>Report), increased activation was found in brain regions involved in the DMN, which has been linked to introspective mental activities such as mind wandering (Andrews-Hanna 2012). Again, this confirms Fleming et al. (2012), who reported similar patterns in this contrast.


Drug effects

As expected, subjective measures (5D-ASC) revealed that ketamine caused phenomenological experiences significantly deviating from a normal state of consciousness on all scales of the questionnaire. This finding confirms the known psychotomimetic effects of ketamine (Anis et al. 1983; Vlisides et al. 2018) and validates the rationale for using this pharmacological challenge to investigate the glutamatergic basis of metacognition.

Our study is one of only very few to indicate a potential pharmacological modulation of metacognitive performance (Lou et al. 2011; Hauser et al. 2017) and the first to investigate ketamine effects on metacognition. We show that disrupting the glutamatergic system by means of ketamine administration may challenge introspective monitoring processes: at the behavioral level, ketamine application during retrieval resulted in deterioration of metacognitive sensitivity (meta-d′) and overconfidence (larger metacognitive bias). Differences in metacognitive bias have been suggested to reflect genuine differences in awareness (Schwiedrzik et al. 2011), suggesting a role of various conscious processes giving rise to this ketamine effect on metacognitive bias. Furthermore, as overconfidence has been reported in patients with schizophrenia (Moritz et al. 2014), this finding provides another piece of evidence for use of ketamine as a model system of schizophrenia. Importantly, ketamine did not affect retrieval (Type 1) performance, in line with previous reports (Honey et al. 2005b), even though some group-heterogeneity has to be considered in Type 1 performance. Additionally, both Type 1 and Type 2 reaction times were unaffected by ketamine, which also indicates that the drug did not lead to a general deterioration of cognitive performance.

However, when controlling for the influence of Type 1 performance (d′) on metacognitive sensitivity (meta-d′) by calculating metacognitive efficiency (meta-d′/d′), there was no significant group difference. It is advised to apply metacognitive efficiency measures when comparing different groups (Fleming and Lau 2014; Vaccaro and Fleming 2018) although the theoretical assumption of the relationship of Type 1 and Type 2 performance measures (Galvin et al. 2003; Maniscalco and Lau 2012) is frequently violated in cases of “hyper”-metacognitive efficiency (meta-d′/d′ > 1), potentially arising as a consequence of post-decisional and/or second-order computation (Fleming and Daw 2017) as evidence continues to be accumulated after the Type 1 response (Murphy et al. 2015; Rausch and Zehetleitner 2016). In general, meta-d′ represents a measure of an individual’s ability to discriminate between their own correct and incorrect responses independently of differences in response bias (Fleming and Lau 2014) and prior studies have reported meta-d′ either as the only measure of metacognitive sensitivity (Rausch et al. 2015) or alongside the meta-d′/d′ ratio (Beck et al. 2019).

While it is necessary to keep in mind that the ketamine-associated deterioration of Type 2 sensitivity might be influenced by non-significant group-heterogeneity in Type 1 performance, rather than reflecting a general deficit in the underlying metacognitive processes (Maniscalco and Lau 2012), it is still important to understand ketamine effects on meta-d′ in Study Phase I. This is based on the absence of group effects on Type 1 performance in our study but also on the fact that 95% HDIs only narrowly overlapped with zero in two-sided testing for group differences in metacognitive efficiency. The group-level estimation in a hierarchical Bayesian framework offers several methodological advantages over previous estimation methods for metacognitive efficiency (Fleming 2017). As illustrated in, there was an almost perfect fit of the ideal observer model in the placebo group (group-level meta-d′/d′: 0.99), whereas the ketamine group (0.76) substantially deviated from the ideal observer model implied in the meta-d′-framework (Fleming 2017).

Furthermore, we observed a pronounced up-regulation of activity in posterior brain regions with ketamine. This effect was observed only during second-order ratings (including both metacognitive reports and the control condition), whereas Type 1 BOLD showed no difference in activation between the groups. Specifically, there was increased activity in the right-hemispheric superior-posterior cortex compared to placebo. The superior parietal lobe is mainly associated with spatial attention and plays a pivotal role in somatosensory and visuomotor integration (Culham and Valyear 2006; Iacoboni 2006), motor learning (Weiss et al. 2003; Wenderoth et al. 2004), mental rotation (Wolbers et al. 2003; Gogos et al. 2010), with a mosaic of specialized subregions (Wang et al. 2015). Increased BOLD with ketamine also occurred in left calcarine gyrus, where the primary visual cortex is concentrated (Goebel et al. 1998; Seghier et al. 2000); bilateral lingual gyrus, which has been linked to processing vision (especially letter-reading) and encoding visual memories (Mechelli et al. 2000); and left IPL, which is involved in language processing, mathematical operations and body image (Radua et al. 2010), agency (Chaminade and Decety 2002), and working memory (Ravizza et al. 2004). Importantly, these ketamine effects on BOLD were observed for both second-order rating types (Report/Follow) and are therefore not specific to genuine metacognitive processes. It should be noted, however, that Report trials were overall more frequent (2:3) than Follow trials and thus had a greater overall contribution to the ketamine effects on second-order BOLD.

Overall, it appears that ketamine affects brain function during second-order ratings by means of an up-regulation of posterior visuospatial cortical brain areas. The visual, affective word stimuli employed in this study may have evoked vivid, imaginative processes in all participants, irrespective of drug, during retrieval. In participants experiencing the altered state of consciousness induced by ketamine, these imaginative processes may yet have persisted well beyond the retrieval process and consequently perturbed the signal available for the second-order task, irrespective of its specific demands, which could account for both the deterioration in metacognitive sensitivity as well as the increased activation in visuospatial areas during second-order ratings. However, it should be reiterated that it is uncertain to what extent the observed effects are related to metacognition, or whether they do not simply reflect neural responses to the presentation of the rating scale.

It is intriguing, however, that the anatomical location of our results is of interest with regards to the “hot zone” for conscious functions proposed by Koch et al. (2016): As this hot zone primarily encompasses sensory areas, it is mainly associated with phenomenal qualities of conscious experiences, which self-reported 5D-ASC measures confirmed to be altered by ketamine. Thus, as individuals under the influence of ketamine processed the demands of the second-order task (including introspective assessments of their internal mental world), phenomenal qualities of their normal waking-state experience may be distinctly altered. The posterior parietal cortical areas found in this study have been proposed to encode decision confidence (Kiani and Shadlen 2009), but recent studies suggest that activity in these areas tracks reliability of the sensory input rather than the core process of confidence formation (Bang and Fleming 2018). Accordingly, our findings suggest that not confidence formation itself, but early aspects of the metacognitive process could be impacted by ketamine as individuals struggle to make sense of a distorted input signal which results in an up-regulation of neural activity, whereas episodic memory or processing speed remain largely unaffected.

This interpretation is supported by evidence that ketamine increases bilateral temporoparietal functional connectivity (Höflich et al. 2015) and causes a significant alpha current reduction in posterior cortical areas such as precuneus and temporoparietal junction, which may reflect efforts to maintain ego integrity (Carhart-Harris et al. 2014; Vlisides et al. 2018). The ketamine-induced psychedelic state is characterized by elevated entropy in certain aspects of brain function, thereby collapsing the highly organized, low-entropy activity within the DMN (Carhart-Harris et al. 2014). This is in line with the notion by Carhart-Harris et al. (2014) that DMN integrity is a key foundation for accurate metacognition: upon perturbing DMN activity by inducing a psychedelic state, the functionality of metacognitive processes should hence be reduced, whereas the retrieval process may in many cases be based on a notion of familiarity with the word item, and therefore depend less on DMN integrity.

To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the findings, there are additional aspects to be considered. First, the lack of correlation between the 5D-ASC index of altered consciousness and ketamine effects on metacognitive sensitivity makes it difficult to draw a direct connection between the ketamine-induced altered subjective state and the observed objective effects on metacognition—although it may not be adequate to assume both effects to take place on the same conscious level, since the impairment of metacognition represents unconscious effects on conscious decisions (such as ratings given on the 5D-ASC). Second, it has to be considered that different causes might result in a deterioration of metacognitive sensitivity. Both a reduction in the sensory reliability of the input to the metacognitive process (i.e. increased noise in the evidence on which confidence formation is based) as well as trial-to-trial variability in the placement of confidence criteria might account for this effect. A clear interpretation remains difficult, but exploratory analysis of metacognitive bias, which revealed significantly higher bias (i.e. overconfidence) for the ketamine group, offers potential insights into the underlying mechanisms: fluctuations across individual trials in participants’ confidence indicate that participants under the influence of ketamine based their confidence ratings on certain conscious experiences, which could be due to changes in conscious access as well as altered, hallucinatory-like experiences, and which are ultimately unknown to the experimenter (Fleming and Lau 2014). Ultimately, it is possible that the unspecific up-regulation of the posterior parietal areas during second-order ratings reflect either the disturbances in signal input or alterations in conscious experience, or even both.


Study Phase II


Drug effects

There were no ketamine effects on Type 1 sensitivity or Type 2 sensitivity and efficiency of items encoded during maintained drug infusion. This was confirmed by exploratory hierarchical Bayesian estimation of group-level metacognitive efficiency; unexpectedly, there was no group difference in metacognitive performance for Study Phase II. The absence of ketamine effects on retrieval is in accordance with previous studies (Honey et al. 2005a,b) using a very similar LoP manipulation. We found no drug-related group differences in functional activity during encoding in the continued presence of drug infusion and were thus unable to reproduce the increased activation for deeply encoded items in left PFC with ketamine reported by Honey et al. (2005a). Moreover, there were no effects of ketamine on either Type 1 or Type 2 reaction times, again indicating that ketamine did not affect reaction speed. However, metacognitive bias (overconfidence) was again significantly higher in the ketamine group, as was the case in Study Phase I. Even when ketamine was absent at retrieval, ketamine participants were overconfident about their mnestic judgments, suggesting that ketamine evokes substantial distortions in the placement of confidence criteria, irrespective of whether encoding or retrieval took place under the influence of ketamine. While it not possible to retroactively rule out a baseline difference in confidence level between the groups, an overall diffuse memory trace might account for the observed overconfidence, as ketamine affects source memory (Honey et al. 2005b). Therefore, ketamine effects on metacognitive bias could be driven by shared and distinct mechanisms for the two study phases.


Limitations

The employment of a between-subjects-design might be a potential shortcoming, as homogeneity in all relevant individual factors can never be achieved across the groups. However, the advantage of this design is that expectancy biases based on experience with the first of two assessments in a within-subjects-design are eliminated.

Whilst the infusion protocol served to keep plasma levels of ketamine constant, it cannot be ruled out that participants became accustomed to the ketamine-induced state of consciousness and developed mechanisms to stabilize higher-order cognitive functions over the course of the infusion. This potential habituation effect may account for the observation that encoding processes in Study Phase II were less affected by ketamine than previously observed (Honey et al. 2005a,b).

As participants were not informed about the subsequent retrieval task at encoding in either study phase, it is important to point out that during the encoding task in Study Phase II, participants might have been more likely to infer the subsequent memory testing, which could have altered their encoding strategy. This introduces an additional difference between the two study phases, which complicates a direct comparison of ketamine effects between the phases.

Another limitation is that only trials with correctly retrieved items could be included in the fMRI analyses, due to the fact that the majority of participants produced an insufficient amount of incorrect answers in the Type 1 task. Finally, even though the combined sample size of both groups corresponded to sample sizes of previous within-subject designs (Steffens et al. 2016, Van Loon et al. 2016), it is possible that the study lacked sufficient power to detect a statistically significant difference between groups not only on metacognitive sensitivity but also on efficiency.

Generally, additional research is required to gain further understanding of ketamine effects on metacognition. Such potential future research efforts could encompass the application of advanced modeling capable of contrasting theories, such as the Stochastic Detection and Retrieval Model (Jang et al. 2012), which could help disentangle the underlying mechanisms of the observed effects and allow to discriminate between increased noise in the sensory evidence accumulation and trial-by-trial variability in the placement of confidence criteria. Furthermore, dynamic causal modeling of fMRI results could also help to clarify the extent to which the vivid, imaginative processes affect brain activity during second-order ratings.


Conclusions

In summary, we present evidence for a role of the NMDA-glutamate-receptor antagonist ketamine in metacognition, including significantly larger metacognitive bias and deterioration of metacognitive sensitivity with ketamine. We also observed unspecific up-regulation of activity in posterior brain areas during second-order ratings compared to placebo. Importantly, ketamine did not affect metacognitive efficiency as estimated in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. The reported effects are neither sufficiently strong nor specific enough to attribute metacognition solely to the function of the glutamatergic system. Our results do, however, suggest that ketamine impacts on metacognition, which could be due to a reduction in the sensory reliability of the input to the metacognitive process as well as alterations in conscious experience. Further research is required in order to expand our understanding of the neural and pharmacological underpinnings of metacognition.


Contributor Information

Mirko Lehmann, Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Claudia Neumann, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Sven Wasserthal, Department of Psychiatry and Division of Medical Psychology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Johannes Schultz, Center for Economics and Neuroscience, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Institute for Experimental Epileptology and Cognition Research, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany.

Achilles Delis, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Peter Trautner, Center for Economics and Neuroscience, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Institute for Experimental Epileptology and Cognition Research, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany; Department for NeuroCognition, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany.

René Hurlemann, Department of Psychiatry and Division of Medical Psychology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine & Health Sciences, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany; Research Center Neurosensory Science, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

Ulrich Ettinger, Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Behavioral data available in; fMRI data will be made available upon request.


Sensorimotor predictions shape reported conscious visual experience in a breaking continuous flash suppression task

Lina I Skora, Anil K Seth, Ryan B Scott — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC7970722, CC BY 4.0.

Accounts of predictive processing propose that conscious experience is influenced not only by passive predictions about the world, but also by predictions encompassing how the world changes in relation to our actions—that is, on predictions about sensorimotor contingencies. We tested whether valid sensorimotor predictions, in particular learned associations between stimuli and actions, shape reports about conscious visual experience. Two experiments used instrumental conditioning to build sensorimotor predictions linking different stimuli with distinct actions. Conditioning was followed by a breaking continuous flash suppression task, measuring the speed of reported breakthrough for different pairings between the stimuli and prepared actions, comparing those congruent and incongruent with the trained sensorimotor predictions. In Experiment 1, counterbalancing of the response actions within the breaking continuous flash suppression task was achieved by repeating the same action within each block but having them differ across the two blocks. Experiment 2 sought to increase the predictive salience of the actions by avoiding the repetition within blocks. In Experiment 1, breakthrough times were numerically shorter for congruent than incongruent pairings, but Bayesian analysis supported the null hypothesis of no influence from the sensorimotor predictions. In Experiment 2, reported conscious perception was significantly faster for congruent than for incongruent pairings. A meta-analytic Bayes factor combining the two experiments confirmed this effect. Altogether, we provide evidence for a key implication of the action-oriented predictive processing approach to conscious perception, namely that sensorimotor predictions shape our conscious experience of the world.

Keywords: consciousness, perception, unconscious processing, continuous flash suppression, breaking-CFS


Introduction

A growing body of experimental work, rooted in the predictive processing framework (Rao and Ballard, 1999; Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013), shows that perceptual experiences are influenced by beliefs or predictions about the world. Valid predictions have been shown to facilitate access to visual consciousness (Melloni et al., 2011; Pinto et al., 2015; De Loof et al., 2016; Meijs et al., 2018,b), reduce repetition suppression (Summerfield et al., 2008), improve metacognition (Sherman et al., 2015), and aid interpretation under perceptual ambiguity (Panichello et al., 2013; Aru et al., 2016).

Within the predictive processing framework, predictions are instantiated by probabilistic generative models, encoded in cortical hierarchies. Incoming sensory signals, such as visual input, are compared against descending predictions to give rise to prediction errors (PEs) at each hierarchical level of processing. Minimization of PEs across hierarchical levels implements an approximation to Bayesian inference on the causes of sensory signals. In this framework, conscious sensory experience has been proposed to reflect the perceptual prediction that best suppresses PEs (e.g. Hohwy, 2013; Seth et al., 2016). In other words, conscious experience is shaped, or constituted, by the posterior prediction that ‘best’ predicts the (hidden) causes of sensory signals.

Importantly, minimization of PEs can occur both by updating predictions and by performing actions that (are predicted to) furnish predicted sensory data. PE minimization through action is known as ‘active inference’ (Friston et al., 2010). From an active inference perspective, perceptual experience is influenced not only by ‘passive’ predictions about the world, but more generally by predictions encompassing the coupling or contingency between actions and sensory signals—i.e. on predictions about sensorimotor contingencies (O’Regan and Noë, 2001; Seth, 2014; Clark, 2015). According to this view, the ‘winning’ predictions are not necessarily those which are the most veridical, but those which best support adaptive interactions with the world (Seth, 2014, Clark, 2015, Tschantz et al., 2020). Action is therefore not just an ‘output’ that follows perceptual inference, but is an integral part of our experience of the world.

How do predictions about sensorimotor contingencies affect perceptual experience? Proponents of active inference argue that action execution leads to a generalized ‘sensory attenuation’ across all modalities (Brown et al., 2013), such that sensitivity to all sensory events is reduced during action. However, this leaves open the important question of how conscious perception is shaped by the validity of predictions about sensorimotor contingencies, where such contingencies could reflect, for example, learned associations between a stimulus and an action?

On one view, in line with the facilitatory effects of ‘passive’ perceptual predictions mentioned above, valid predictions about sensorimotor contingencies should enhance perception. Evidence supporting this comes from studies showing that action can help disambiguate a bistable or otherwise ambiguous percept if it is congruent with an aspect of that percept, for example when the direction of movement corresponds to the direction of moving dots (Maruya et al., 2007; Mitsumatsu, 2009; Beets et al., 2010; Di Pace and Saracini, 2014; Suzuki et al., 2019). Here, action is interpreted as providing a predictive cue, biasing or sharpening action-congruent percepts (Yon et al., 2018, 2020a,b; Press et al., 2020).

On another view, valid predictions should lead to weaker perception, on the logic that the corresponding sensory data will be ‘cancelled out’ by the congruent prediction (Wolpert et al., 1995; Bays and Wolpert, 2007). Evidence for this view has been provided predominantly in the domain of touch (famously illustrated by our inability to tickle ourselves, Blakemore et al., 1998). However, some studies suggest that perception of action-congruent outcomes in visual perception may also be attenuated (Cardoso-Leite et al., 2010; but see Schwarz et al., 2018).

Another important issue is the origin of the predictions about sensorimotor contingencies. In many of the studies reported, valid predictions likely reflect long-term structural learning—such as learning which movement will result in a specific direction of object motion (Maruya et al., 2007; Dogge et al., 2019)––rather than the fluid, context-dependent expectations that are highlighted within predictive processing and active inference.

Here, we set out to test whether predictions about sensorimotor contingencies affect reportable conscious perception of visual stimuli. We did this by training arbitrary, contextual (as opposed to structural) stimulus-action associations, and then examining the contribution to conscious experience made by the congruency of sensorimotor predictions. Importantly, we interpret ‘congruency with sensorimotor predictions’ in terms of the action a person takes in response to a stimulus, as opposed to the notion of ‘stimulus-action’ congruence in which, for example, there is a mere correspondence between the direction of an agent’s action and the direction of some stimuli in the world.

We developed a novel two-stage paradigm in which we operationalized sensorimotor contingencies as learned arbitrary associations between visual stimuli and subsequent actions. We call these learned associations ‘sensorimotor predictions’. To examine the effects of valid versus invalid sensorimotor predictions on speed of access to visual consciousness, we used the proxy of breakthrough time in continuous flash suppression (b-CFS; Tsuchiya and Koch, 2005; Jiang et al., 2007); we return to the limitations of b-CFS for measuring the speed of conscious access later.

In the first stage of the paradigm, we used instrumental conditioning to build sensorimotor predictions by linking distinct stimuli with specific actions. Two stimuli were arbitrarily associated with equally simple but distinguishable actions (an index finger or a little finger button press), and a third stimulus was associated with no action. In this design, actions are made in response to stimuli (in line with stimulus-response conditioning paradigms), rather than actions triggering a stimulus or causing some other change in the world. Thus, in a sense, we are building sensorimotor predictions in a ‘reversed’ direction (Elsner and Hommel, 2001)––an issue we return to in the Discussion.

In the second stage, each of the three stimuli used in the conditioning task, as well as a fourth, novel, previously unseen stimulus, was presented under CFS, where a dynamically flashing high-contrast pattern displayed to one eye is used to suppress visual awareness of the target stimulus displayed to the other eye, while participants prepared to respond with stimulus-congruent or non-congruent action. We were therefore able to examine the extent to which maintaining a valid prediction of a sensorimotor association (through response preparation) facilitates reported conscious access to the associated stimulus, compared to an invalid prediction. Speed of access of each stimulus to visual consciousness was assessed using breakthrough time in CFS (breaking-CFS or b-CFS; Jiang et al., 2007), measuring the time it takes for the target to overcome interocular suppression and become consciously visible. We hypothesised that preparing an action associated through training with a specific stimulus should engage a valid sensorimotor prediction, facilitating conscious experience of that stimulus and yielding faster reported breakthrough times.

Two experiments were conducted with the same conditioning task but with minor differences to the b-CFS task. In Experiment 1, the counterbalancing of action and stimuli was achieved at the block level by having the same prepared action for each trial within a b-CFS block, with actions differing only between blocks. As each block contained one presentation of each of four visual stimuli, this ensured that each action was paired with each stimulus on only one occasion. For example, if the action for block 1 was the index finger button press, participants would use their index finger to respond when each of the four different visual stimuli broke through b-CFS. Then in block 2, they would use their little finger to respond, again as each of the four different visual stimuli broke through b-CFS. However, a limitation of this design is that enforcing repetition of one action within a block may have reduced that action’s predictive salience. Experiment 2 addressed this limitation by varying the prepared actions within each b-CFS block, while still ensuring counterbalancing of the stimulus-action pairing across the two blocks. A second minor variation made to the b-CFS task in Experiment 2 sought to separate two different contributions to response times. In Experiment 1 participants had to indicate the orientation of a single pixel line overlaid on the stimulus at the moment it broke through suppression; the inclusion of this judgment seeks to reduce premature responses. In Experiment 2, this line orientation judgment was made subsequent to the initial reaction time response, thus avoiding adding noise to the measure of breakthrough time. Both Experiments were pre-registered on the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/ensba (Experiment 1) and https://osf.io/ez62m (Experiment 2). All material, task code and data are available at https://osf.io/hpsju/.


Experiment 1


Materials and Methods


Participants

68 participants (11 male; M age = 20, SD = 2.38, range: 19–32) were recruited for the study via the University of Sussex online recruitment system, and an internal mailing list. All participated in exchange for course credit. Participants were required to have normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and no current or history of neurological illness. Ethical approval was granted by the Science and Technology Cross-School Research Ethics Committee at the University of Sussex, and the study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.


Stimuli and materials

The experiment was implemented in Matlab 2017 b (MathWorks, 2017) with the Cogent2000 toolbox (UCL LoN, 2003). All stimuli were presented on a Dell monitor (1280 x 1024) with a refresh rate of 60 Hz. Responses were collected with a standard keyboard.

The target stimuli included three sets of four cues. Each set contained four 90° rotations of the same symbol—a neutral, asymmetrical shape, generated by manually overlaying shapes on each other to generate an abstract figure which looks distinct upon rotation. All stimuli were 119 by 119 pixels in size (3.43° visual angle), presented in dark grey (RGB: 80,80,80) on lighter grey (RGB: 128,128,128) background. The Mondrian patterns for CFS were composed of coloured rectangles in a box 240 by 240 pixels in size (6.91° visual angle). On each trial, 10 different Mondrian patterns were presented in a random non-repeating sequence every second (i.e. the pattern changed at 10 Hz).


Procedure

Each participant completed two experimental conditions in a single experimental session, one where conditioning was completed consciously (where stimuli were clearly visible), and a second where conditioning was attempted subliminally (where stimuli were presented without conscious awareness). The conditions consisted of the same two main stages. Stage 1 was an instrumental conditioning task (2 blocks of 60 trials), and Stage 2 was a breaking-CFS task (2 blocks of 4 trials each). A brief set of practice trials was completed prior to Stage 1. Throughout both stages, participants were asked to look at the screen through a mirror stereoscope, fitted atop a chinrest at a 50 cm distance from the screen. Ocular dominance was established prior to beginning the experiment with a standard Miles test (Miles, 1930).

Here, we report the conscious condition only, as we found strong evidence that the stimulus-action associations were not learnt in the unconscious condition (see for the procedure and results of the unconscious instrumental conditioning task). Given that our primary interest here is to examine the effect that predictions about learned stimulus-action associations have on breaking-CFS, it would not be informative to analyse data from a condition where those associations were not acquired. The order of the conditions was randomized for each participant. The conditions were independent, and used different sets of stimuli (randomized).


Conditioning task

The conditioning task was used to establish the sensorimotor (stimulus-action) associations. The task used three stimuli selected from the assigned set of four. One of the stimuli (cue A) was paired with action A (an index finger button press), a second (cue B) with action B (a little finger button press), and a third (no-action cue) with no action. For practical reasons, the index finger button press was made on the left arrow, and the little finger button press on the right arrow. Note that while the keys being pressed differed, we consider the finger used to make the button press to be the conditioned action, not the button. Cues were randomly assigned to a given stimulus type for each participant. The order of presentation was randomized with an equal number of exposures to each cue occurring in each block of trials. Participants performed 120 conditioning trials in two blocks of 60, with a 1 min break between the blocks.

In this task, both eyes were presented with the stimuli, i.e. there was no CFS and the stimuli were clearly visible. On each trial, stimulus presentation started with a fade-up period of 500 ms. A further 500 ms after the stimulus reached full contrast, the fixation dot (overlaid on top of the cue) changed colour, indicating that a response was required (see for a trial sequence). Fixation dot colours provided the distinction between action and no-action trials. For action cues, participants were instructed to respond with either action A or B (of their choosing), when prompted by the fixation dot changing colour from white to black. Following the action, positive or negative reinforcing feedback was delivered (‘correct!’ or ‘wrong!’ printed on the screen paired with a cash register or buzz sound, respectively) depending on the correspondence between the executed action and the cue presented, thus instantiating instrumental conditioning. For example, if cue A was presented and action A was executed, positive feedback was delivered, but if cue A was presented and action B was executed, negative feedback was delivered. If a participant refrained from action in response to an action cue, they received negative feedback. For no-action cues, the fixation dot started as blue, and changed colour to red. This indicated to participants at the onset of the trial that no response will be required. In these no-action trials negative feedback was delivered if participants responded with either action A or B, and positive feedback if they correctly refrained from action. As such, the presented cue became associated with the ‘no action’ response.

On action trials, the cue disappeared as soon as participants made a response (a total of 1000 ms + reaction time after cue onset). This ensured that the action was prepared and executed while the participant was exposed to the cue. On no-action trials, the cue disappeared as soon as the fixation dot changed which for these trials was set to be 1500 ms after cue onset (500 ms longer than in action trials). This additional 500 ms sought to roughly equalize the total exposure duration for no-action trials, where there was no response time, and action trials where the exposure extended to include the participant’s response time.


Breakthrough task

The conditioning task was immediately followed by a breaking-CFS task, using the set of cues from the conditioning task (cue A, cue B, no-action cue), as well as the fourth, novel cue, never previously seen (the last from the set). In the breakthrough task, the stimuli were presented under CFS, with the target cue presented to the non-dominant eye, while the dominant eye received a Mondrian pattern (see Stimuli and materials Section).

Each cue was presented with a randomly assigned white horizontal or vertical line (1 pixel wide) overlaid on top of it. In order to quantify the time of breakthrough, participants were asked to report the orientation of the line using the ‘1’ (horizontal) and ‘2’ (vertical) buttons on the keypad, as soon as they were able to discriminate it. Note that they were required to report the line orientation even for cues previously associated with ‘no-action’. Despite the fact that the line orientation judgment was not part of the stimulus-action congruency training, we used it to quantify the time of breakthrough, reasoning that enhanced perception of the dark grey stimulus should be accompanied by enhanced perception of the white line overlaid on top of it. On each trial, the target cue faded-up over 500 ms, and remained on screen in full contrast, concurrently with the continuously flashing Mondrian pattern, until the response was made. See for an illustration of the trial sequence.

The task was split into two blocks, with all four stimuli presented in each block in a randomized order, resulting in a total of eight trials. When indicating the line orientation, participants were required to make their response with the same action for all the trials in a single block, i.e. using the index finger to press button ‘1’ or ‘2’, or the little finger to press button ‘1’ or ‘2’ throughout. The assigned action (use of index finger or little finger) was randomized between blocks. This design ensured that each cue was matched with each action type once (e.g. action A is performed to indicate time of breakthrough for cue A, cue B, no-action cue, and the novel cue in one block, and action B in the other).


Results


Bayes factors

For hypothesis testing, Bayes Factors (Bs) will be reported alongside P-values for all comparisons. Bs can help to disambiguate non-significant results as either indicating support for the null hypothesis (H0, positing no effect), support for the alternative hypothesis (H1, which uses an estimated raw effect size as the standard deviation of its distribution), or indicating insensitive data (i.e. the data are not in favour of either H0 or H1; Dienes, 2014). By convention, Bs smaller than 1/3 indicate evidence for H0. Bs larger than 3 indicate evidence for H1. Bs between those values indicate insensitive data.


Conditioning task


Data pre-processing and exclusions

All trials with RTs under 100 ms (suggesting automatic, rather than deliberate, responding) and greater than 3SD from each subject’s mean were excluded. This resulted in removal of 373 trials (4.57% of all trials). Subjects missing over 25% of trials were marked for exclusion. No such subjects were identified.

Accuracy data for the conditioning task was then converted into type I d’, in order to account for potential response bias. Type I d’ is a signal detection-theoretic measure of sensitivity to signal versus noise (Stanislaw and Todorov, 1999). While d’ is not a direct measure of learning, we consider it a good proxy—if participants successfully learn the stimulus-action associations, they should have a greater discrimination ability, reflected as greater d’. D’ was computed for each cue separately using the proportions of correct (correct action deployed for the corresponding cue, e.g. cue A—action A; Hits) and incorrect (wrong action deployed, e.g. cue A—action B or no action; False Alarm) responses.


Evidence of conditioning

In order to assess the presence of learning, one-sample t-tests were used to contrast the d’ values for each cue type against 0 (indicating no ability to discern signal from noise). By proxy, a d’ of 0 can be taken as an indicator that learning failed to take place. Bs were computed with H1 modelled as a half-normal distribution centred on 0, with an SD equal to an approximate expected effect size of d’ = 1 (corresponding to 70% hit rate). Analysis was conducted in R (R Core Team, 2018).

The average d’ scores for all cues throughout the task were significantly above 0, suggesting that learning of the cue-action association was successfully established.In the conditioning stage, subjects were marked as ‘learners’ if their d’ scores for both cues A and B in block 2 (where learning should be evident if it had taken place) were greater than 0. The no-action cue was not included in the learning calculation because the presence of a coloured fixation dot indicating no action was required made the response obvious. Indeed it yielded a nearly perfect accuracy and nearly perfect hit rates with very few false alarms, and this occurred regardless of the ability to learn the associations between the other cues and their outcomes. This near ceiling level performance resulted in an extremely high no-action cue d’; although it is noteworthy that d’ is in principle unbounded. Fifty-five (out of 68) subjects were identified as learners and included in the next analysis stage.


Breakthrough task


Data pre-processing and exclusions

No trials with response times under 100 ms were identified. Unlike the conditioning task, no upper cut-off on RTs was applied, as long response times were expected. All trials where subjects made an incorrect line discrimination (horizontal/vertical) were excluded in order to reduce premature responses and ensure only trials where participants paid attention were analysed (see Discussion for consideration of the related issue of accurately guessed responses). This resulted in the removal of 65 trials (11.96%). Five subjects with 50% (4) or more missing trials were removed. While in the pre-registration we did not expect an upper cut-off would be necessary, one extra trial was removed due to the participant failing to engage with the task, which resulted in a response time of almost 4 min. One subject was removed from both conditions due to a disruption in the testing session. Both cases were noted by the experimenter in the session log. Only the subjects identified as learners in the conditioning stage were brought into the breakthrough time analysis stage. This resulted in a final sample of 49. We confirmed that, averaging across trial types, there was no significant difference in response times between actions A and B (MactionA = 5817.87, MactionB = 5894.63 ms; t(172) = –0.52, P = 0.607).

Each breakthrough trial was given a label describing its cue-action congruence status (i.e. whether the action prepared to indicate breakthrough was congruent or incongruent with the cue, as established in the conditioning task). Action A—cue A and action B—cue B pairs were labelled as congruent pairs. Action A—cue B and action B—cue A were labelled as incongruent pairs. Cue C was always labelled as no-action, and the fourth, previously unseen cue, was labelled novel.


Breakthrough time results

Due to the unevenly distributed missing values (i.e. exclusions due to incorrect line orientation judgments) across few data points per participant, the pre-registered analysis method (repeated-measures analysis of variance) was rendered inappropriate. An ANOVA excludes such cases listwise, resulting in excluded participants and reduced power. Given superior performance in treatment of repeated-measures data and data with unevenly distributed missing values, as well as superior ability to model repeated-measures, a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) was fitted instead. Analysis was conducted using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015) in R (R Core Team, 2018).

The model included the raw times of breakthrough as the response variable, and cue-action congruence status (4 levels: congruent, incongruent, no-action, novel) as a fixed effect. We began with a maximal random effects specification (as outlined in the pre-registration), but followed the advice to suppress random slopes due to model non-convergence, retaining subject-specific random intercepts [In R notation, the fixed and random effects of the model were specified as: breakthrough time ∼ congruence index + (1|subjectID)]. (Matuschek et al., 2017; Singmann and Kellen, 2019). A gamma distribution of the response variable, with an identity link function, was specified in order to approximate the nature of response time data without the need for transformations (Lo and Andrews, 2015). The model was fitted by maximum likelihood estimation. All following comparisons were conducted on that model.

The GLMM revealed a significant main effect of congruence status on time of breakthrough (χ2 (3) = 12.52, P = 0.006; see for regression coefficients). Subsequent pairwise comparisons on estimated means (Tukey-adjusted for multiple comparisons) showed that only the novel, previously unseen cue (M = 6207 ms, SE = 64.39) resulted in significantly shorter breakthrough time than both congruent (M = 6311 ms, SE = 50.09) and incongruent cues (M = 6356 ms, SE = 62.44). Despite a marginally shorter breakthrough time for congruent than incongruent cues, given the adopted priors and the size of the observed effect, the Bayes factor indicates strong evidence against a genuine difference. For B calculation, H1 was modelled as a normal distribution centred on 0, with an SD equal to an estimated effect size of 774 ms. This estimate was derived from the observed difference between rewarded and unrewarded cues in a similar b-CFS task conducted earlier by some of the authors (Scott et al., in preparation).


Conclusions of experiment 1

In Experiment 1, we investigated whether valid sensorimotor predictions, built through instrumental conditioning, can affect conscious experience, operationalized in terms of reportable access to consciousness in breaking interocular suppression. If sensorimotor predictions shape conscious experience, we hypothesised that congruency between the cue and the prepared action would result in the cue breaking through CFS faster.

While the data showed, numerically, marginally shorter breakthrough times for congruent than for incongruent pairs, given the adopted priors and the size of the observed difference the evidence was in favour of the null hypothesis. Specifically, preparing an action congruent with a specific cue (i.e. one previously conditioned with that action) while it was presented under interocular suppression does not shorten the suppression duration relative to preparing an action incongruent with the cue. Therefore, these data do not support the hypothesis that a valid prediction of a cue-action association speeds up reported access to consciousness of the target.

These findings are counter to the results of previous research which did show modulation of perception by action in line with action-congruent percepts (e.g. Maruya et al., 2007; Mitsumatsu, 2009; Beets et al., 2010). While it is possible that our result reflects a genuine absence of influence arising from sensorimotor predictions, it is also possible that the paradigm may have limited the predictive salience of the prepared action. While requiring the same action on each trial within a block ensured counterbalancing of the action-preparation and stimulus congruency, it may also have caused participants to deploy action in an automatic, rather than voluntary, goal-oriented manner. Indeed, previous research has suggested that the stimulus-action contingencies should adaptively reflect a goal or objective in order to facilitate interactions with the world (Hommel et al., 2001, 2010; Prinz, 2003; Mitsumatsu, 2009; Di Pace and Saracini, 2014; Seth, 2014; Seth et al., 2016; Wohlschläger, 2000). The requirement for repetitive action may have inadvertently eliminated this important aspect of the behaviour.

A second potentially confounding influence arises from the timing of the requirement to report the line orientation. Participants were required to press the key corresponding to a vertical or horizontal line overlaid on the stimulus as soon as they began to see the stimulus break through CFS. It is plausible that the decision time relating to the orientation judgment added noise to the measure of breakthrough time. We designed a second experiment, Experiment 2, to address both these issues.


Experiment 2

Experiment 2 introduced two changes to the breakthrough task described in Experiment 1. Because keeping the action requirement consistent across the entire block may have resulted in participants executing the action in an automatic manner, thus reducing the predictive salience of the prepared action, we varied the action requirement from trial to trial. We also requested the participants to make a single response (with the corresponding action) to indicate that they can see the stimulus, followed by a line orientation judgment performed independently with the other hand. All other task parameters remained the same.


Materials and Methods


Participants

65 participants (18 males; M age = 20.78, SD = 4.31, range = 18-47) were recruited for the study via the University of Sussex online recruitment system, and an internal mailing list. All participation criteria were identical to Experiment 1. Data for one participant was unusable due to software malfunction, resulting in a sample of 64.


Stimuli and materials

All stimuli and materials were identical to Experiment 1.


Procedure

The procedure was identical to the conscious conditioning task of Experiment 1 with the exception of the minor changes made to the breakthrough task outlined below.


Conditioning task

Identical to Experiment 1.


Breakthrough task

The conditioning task was immediately followed by the b-CFS task, using the same set of cues (cue A, cue B, no-action cue), as well as fourth, novel cue, never previously seen. The task parameters remained the same as in Experiment 1. In contrast to Experiment 1, the response requirement (action A or B) was no longer repeated without variation within each block. Instead, participants were instructed at trial onset which action would be required to make the response (in a randomized order, but counterbalanced such that each of the four cues is matched with each of the two actions once, resulting in eight trials). This change was considered to be important in order to maintain the predictive salience of the action.

Additionally, in order to eliminate the potentially confounding influence of line orientation judgment on pure breakthrough time, these two responses were separated. Participants were required to respond with the instructed action (A or B) using the return key as soon as they saw the image break through (as opposed to responding as soon as they were able to discriminate the line orientation). After the initial response both the image and the Mondrian pattern disappeared and participants were required to indicate the perceived line orientation; this was done using the ‘1’ (horizontal) and ‘2’ (vertical) buttons at the top of the keyboard using their left hand.


Results


Conditioning task


Data pre-processing and exclusions

Pre-processing and exclusion procedures were identical to Experiment 1. All trials with RTs under 100 ms and under or over 3SD from each subject’s mean were excluded. This resulted in removal of 225 trials (2.9% of all trials). Subjects missing over 25% of trials were marked for exclusion. No such subjects were identified.


Evidence of conditioning

As in Experiment 1, one-sample t-tests were used to contrast the d’ values for each cue type against 0 (indicating no sensitivity to signal versus noise). By proxy, a d’ of 0 can be taken as an indicator that learning failed to take place. Bs were computed with H1 modelled as a half-normal distribution centred on 0, with an SD equal to an estimated expected effect size of d’ = 1 (corresponding to 70% hit rate).

The d’ scores for all cues in both blocks of the conditioning task, and in total, were significantly above 0, suggesting that learning of the cue-action association was again successfully established.

Subjects were marked as learners if their d’ scores for both cues A and B in block 2 (where learning should be evident if it had taken place) were greater than 0. The no-action cue was not included in this criterion, as due to the obvious no-action requirement it yielded a nearly perfect accuracy regardless of the ability to learn the associations between the other cues and their outcomes. Fifty-eight subjects were identified as learners and included in the next analysis stage.


Breakthrough task


Data pre-processing and exclusions

Pre-processing and exclusion procedures were identical to Experiment 1. No trials with response times under 100 ms were identified. Again, no upper cut-off on RTs was applied, as long response times were expected. All trials where subjects made an incorrect line discrimination were excluded. This resulted in the removal of 46 trials (9%). Three subjects with 50% (4) or more missing trials were removed. This resulted in the final sample of 55 subjects. While in the pre-registration we did not expect an upper cut-off to be necessary, we did encounter five extremely long trials, which were negatively affecting the data distribution (assessed with inspecting the QQ plots) and thus preventing model convergence. Those trials were also removed. Again we confirmed that, averaging across trial types, there was no significant difference in response times between actions A and B (MactionA = 6610.41 ms, MactionB = 6217.86 ms; t(192) = 0.36, P = 0.715).

Each breakthrough trial was given a label describing its cue-action congruence status following the identical procedure as used in Experiment 1.


Breakthrough time results

The model and analysis performed was identical to that in Experiment 1. A GLMM was fitted to the data, including the raw times of breakthrough as the response variable. Model specification included the cue-action congruence status (four levels: congruent, incongruent, no-action, novel) as a fixed effect, and subject-specific random intercepts, and was fit with a gamma distribution with an identity link function (Lo and Andrews, 2015). The model was fitted by maximum likelihood estimation. All following comparisons were conducted on that model.

As in Experiment 1, the GLMM revealed a significant main effect of congruence status on time of breakthrough (χ2 (3) = 158.28, P < 0.001; see for regression coefficients). Subsequent pairwise comparisons on estimated means (Tukey-adjusted for multiple comparisons) showed that cue-action congruent breakthrough times (M = 6516 ms, SE = 30.3) were significantly shorter than incongruent breakthrough times (M = 6809 ms, SE = 44.6), mirroring the direction of effect found in Experiment 1. Crucially, however, in this instance the size of the difference was substantial, with the Bayes factor providing strong evidence in favour of H1. Cue-action congruent breakthrough times were also shorter than no-action breakthrough times (M = 6691 ms, SE = 39.6), but significantly longer than breakthrough times for novel cues (M = 6340 ms, SE = 41.9; for pairwise comparisons). In addition, the cue-action incongruent breakthrough times were significantly longer than no-action breakthrough times. Novel cues resulted in the shortest breakthrough times.

The statistics obtained in pairwise comparisons for Experiment 1 and 2 were then combined in order to calculate a meta-analytic Bayes factor, a single Bayes factor indicating evidence for H0 or H1 in a group of studies. Posterior parameters were computed for each pairwise comparison using the estimated mean differences and standard errors from Experiment 1 as priors, and the estimated mean differences and standard errors from Experiment 2 as likelihoods (following the method from Dienes, 2014). The resulting mean and the standard deviation of the posterior distribution were then used in the meta-B calculation in a manner identical to regular B calculation, where H1 was modelled as a normal distribution centred on 0, with an SD equal to an estimated effect size of 774 ms. See for the meta-Bs for each cue-action pairing.


Conclusions of experiment 2

In Experiment 2, we continued to investigate whether sensorimotor predictions, built through instrumental conditioning, can affect conscious experience, as measured by reported access to consciousness in breaking interocular suppression. We amended the b-CFS task used in Experiment 1 in order to address limitations in the initial design. If sensorimotor predictions shape reported conscious experience, we predicted that congruency between the prepared action and the cue would cause the cue to break through CFS faster.

The results show that a valid sensorimotor prediction does affect the speed of reported access to consciousness. Preparing an action that was congruent with the cue it was conditioned on resulted in significantly faster breakthrough than an incongruent action. This finding is further supported by the meta-analytic Bayes factor analysis, which pooled the results from Experiments 1 and 2. Together the data provides strong support for the hypothesis that conscious experience is affected by sensorimotor predictions—if the executed action is congruent with the cue-action predictive model, reported access to consciousness is facilitated. While the central hypothesis was supported, the shortest breakthrough time was seen for the novel cue. While not in conflict with the key finding, the framework of action-oriented predictive processing does not offer a ready explanation for this pattern. We return to this issue in the general discussion.


General Discussion

Predictive processing proposes that conscious experience is shaped or constituted by the predictive model that best explains the incoming sensory input. Action-oriented interpretations expand this notion, suggesting that perceptual predictions should encompass sensorimotor contingencies—i.e. predictions of the relationships between an agent’s actions and changes in the world (Seth, 2014, Clark, 2015). We sought to empirically test whether conscious experience is affected by valid predictions about learned sensorimotor (stimulus-action) associations—which we here call ‘sensorimotor predictions’.

We developed a novel paradigm in which we used instrumental conditioning to build arbitrary, contextual sensorimotor associations, linking distinct cues with specific actions or with no action. Conditioning was followed by a breaking-CFS task, where a high-contrast pattern was used to suppress visual awareness of the target cues while participants prepared to respond with cue-congruent or non-congruent actions. Through the proxy of breaking interocular suppression, this paradigm allowed us to test the extent to which maintaining the relevant sensorimotor prediction through action preparation facilitates reported conscious access to the associated stimulus, relative to non-congruent stimuli, as well as stimuli associated with no action, and novel stimuli that had not undergone any conditioning exposure.

Experiment 1 failed to find a relationship between sensorimotor predictions and breakthrough times. This finding went against our initial hypothesis and conflicted with previous evidence showing modulation of conscious perception by action (Maruya et al., 2007; Mitsumatsu, 2009; Beets et al., 2010; Di Pace and Saracini, 2014). However, the design of Experiment 1 likely limited the predictive salience of the prepared action. Requiring the same action on each trial within a block (targeted at counterbalancing the stimulus-action congruency) may have caused participants to deploy action in an automatic, rather than dynamic, goal-oriented fashion that diminished the relative importance of action related predictions. It is also noteworthy that with a relatively small number of training trials, sleep might be an important factor in consolidating the learned sensorimotor predictions (e.g. Hindy et al., 2019). While here we chose to focus on methodological changes to sensitivity of the task, this could be a potential avenue for future research.

In Experiment 2, we addressed this limitation by varying the action requirement on each trial. We also reduced the potential for measurement noise in the breakthrough judgment by separating the response indicating the moment of conscious breakthrough from the response indicating the line orientation. While both experiments delivered numerically shorter breakthrough times for congruent versus incongruent cue-action pairings, the modifications designed to improve the predictive salience of the action resulted in considerably larger differences. In Experiment 2, Bayes factor analysis showed strong evidence in favour of a genuine difference based on congruency. Breakthrough time for the no-action cue was also longer than for the action-congruent cue. This is again consistent with our hypothesis, because executing either action A or B would engage the corresponding prediction related to perception of cue A or B, effectively rendering the no-action cue incongruent with either. Importantly, a meta-analytic Bayes factor analysis, where the results from Experiments 1 and 2 were pooled to obtain a single Bayes factor for each comparison, provides strong support for the alternative hypothesis (i.e. congruent predictions accelerate conscious access) across the two experiments.

This result supports the action-oriented interpretations of predictive processing, where conscious experience is affected by valid sensorimotor predictions. It extends the past evidence of a facilitatory role of action on perception (Maruya et al., 2007; Mitsumatsu, 2009; Beets et al., 2010; Dogge et al., 2019; Suzuki et al., 2019) by showing that learned contextual associations can furnish sensorimotor predictions to enhance perception. This result stands in contrast to the ‘cancellation’ accounts, where expected events, such as the consequences of one’s movements, are tuned down and perceived less (Cardoso-Leite et al., 2010). In a recent series of studies, Yon and colleagues (2018, 2020) empirically contrasted the ‘enhancement’ and ‘cancellation’ models, showing that action-congruence biases participants’ perception towards expected outcomes and sharpens the expected sensory representations, in line with Bayesian inference (see also Schwarz et al., 2018; Yon et al., 2020a,b). Our result provides support for this conclusion, and could rely on a similar mechanism.

A surprising finding in both Experiments was that the novel cue was significantly faster to break through than both the congruent and incongruent cue-pairings. While this result is contrary to some previous research examining the facilitatory effects of expectation on access to awareness (e.g. Pinto et al., 2015), it is consistent with reports of greater attentional capture for the first unannounced presentation of novel cues (Al-Aidroos et al., 2010; Becker and Horstmann, 2011; c.f. Meijs et al., 2018a; Ernst et al., 2020). Under predictive processing, these effects might seem at odds—presentation of a novel, unexpected cue yields a high PE, which in turn should take longer to be resolved, resulting in slower, rather than facilitated, perception. Indeed, there is an active debate in the predictive processing literature about whether predictions (expectations) or PEs (incoming sensory signal) should dominate perceptual content and perceptual access. The balance is proposed to be modulated by attention, which up- or down-weights precision afforded to predictions or PEs (Feldman and Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2012). Recently, it has been proposed that perception is initially biased towards the expected, but particularly salient or surprising events—such as a novel, unpredicted stimulus in our study—are up-weighted (Press et al., 2020). Future extensions of our paradigm may usefully target this question.

It is noteworthy that in the present task we operationalized sensorimotor contingencies as learned arbitrary associations between visual stimuli and subsequent actions. We called those associations ‘sensorimotor predictions’, and manipulated their predictive validity to evaluate reported conscious access. While this mapping constitutes a kind of contingency, one might note that it reverses the direction of what is typically understood as sensorimotor contingencies, i.e. how the world changes in response to our actions (e.g. Seth, 2014). Nor do our learned associations correspond to temporally extended relationships between actions and sensory signals, such as when an object is rotated (e.g. Suzuki et al., 2019). As such, the sensorimotor predictions used here do not correspond to fully-fledged sensorimotor contingencies, but rather to simpler sensorimotor mappings. Nonetheless, the present paradigm could be fruitfully extended to investigate sensorimotor contingencies in the more traditional sense.

The finding that such simple sensorimotor mappings acquired in the learning phase were able to affect visual perception also has broader implications for research in action learning. There has been previous evidence that agents cannot acquire action-outcome predictions to drive intentional action from simple stimulus-response learning, such as when action is cued by a stimulus, as was the case in our paradigm (Herwig et al., 2007; Herwig and Waszak, 2009). However, our result suggests that agents can indeed translate the experience acquired through stimulus-response learning to furnish predictive action-outcome models (in line with Elsner and Hommel, 2001). While in our study action in the testing phase (bCFS) was forced rather than intentional, investigating whether a similar result is obtained when participants are free to respond intentionally may be an interesting future extension.

An important criticism of b-CFS that should be noted is its interpretation in relation to ‘conscious access’. In b-CFS, the moment understood as the moment of access to consciousness is in fact the moment participants report having conscious awareness of the stimulus. Those events may or may not be the same. For example, participants might have rudimentary awareness of the stimulus but delay reporting it (e.g. due to low confidence). As such, our paradigm and many similar paradigms use b-CFS as a proxy measure of speed of access to consciousness, while recognizing this caveat.

Another general criticism of b-CFS is that the time of breakthrough measure may be affected by other processes or biases (Stein and Sterzer, 2014; Sterzer et al., 2014). A challenge pertaining to all

b-CFS experiments is the difficulty of disentangling the speed of access to conscious (reportable) awareness from the time needed to prepare the response—the measured time of breakthrough inherently includes the time taken to respond, which itself could be affected by other conscious or pre-conscious processes. Our effect could have been driven by unconscious motor priming, where the presence of a masked cue primes a congruent response (e.g. a masked left-pointing arrow priming a participant to respond with a left arrow press; Koivisto and Grassini, 2018; Valuch and Mattler, 2019). In the present experiment, this could have taken the form of a masked cue priming a congruent action. However, participants in our study were actively engaged in preparing the desired response according to instructions on each trial. As such, we believe that any unconscious motor-priming effect would likely be minimal compared to the conscious response preparation, which we argue engages the relevant sensorimotor prediction. Indeed, ongoing action preparation was a key part of our design. Nonetheless, we cannot dismiss the possibility that the effect could be partly driven by motor congruence after breakthrough has spontaneously occurred, in a sense that a cue would speed up the congruent action, relative to the incongruent one. Similarly, a match between the stimulus and the action could increase perceptual confidence, and speed up the response without altering the time of conscious perception. While this is a valid concern, it has been recently shown that higher confidence accompanies both stimulus-congruent and -incongruent actions, relative to neutral actions (Gajdos et al., 2019; Siedlecka et al., 2019). This suggests that perceptual confidence should have a limited effect in our study, at least for the congruent-incongruent comparison.

The time taken to respond could also vary between stimuli or types of response. In this study, the two different responses (index and little finger button presses) were a core feature of our design—indeed, we argued that the preparation of a congruent versus incongruent action is what causes the stimulus to break through faster, in line with the idea that valid sensorimotor predictions shape conscious experience. Importantly, however, average response times (irrespective of congruence) did not differ between the two actions, allowing us to rule out the possibility that any underlying difference in time taken to respond with either action contributed to the result. Nonetheless, this does not preclude the possibility of post-perceptual biases affecting the total response time, such as stimulus features slowing down the action. We attempted to guard against this by ensuring the stimuli were as similar as possible. We used four 90° rotations of the same shape, and (in Experiment 2) disentangled the response indicating the stimulus breakthrough from the response indicating line orientation. Still, however, the extent to which post-perceptual biases affect b-CFS remains a topic deserving further study.

Our b-CFS task used only one presentation per cue-action pairing (e.g. action A was paired once with cue A, cue B, no-action cue, and the novel cue). This design was adopted because we felt that to best address the question of how sensorimotor predictions affect conscious experience, we should focus on the very first conscious experience of the action-associated stimulus. While some previous b-CFS experiments have used multiple trials (e.g. Salomon et al., 2013), repeated exposure itself tends to reduce breakthrough times, which could reduce the ability to observe the main effect of interest. Adopting a single trial per cue-action pairing avoids this issue albeit at the cost of the reduced statistical power resulting from a smaller number of trials. Fortunately, our mixed-effects model proved robust to the small number of observations per participant and converged without issue. In addition, the Bayes Factor calculation ensured that the evidence for or against the differences in breakthrough times was sensitive.

The inclusion of a line orientation judgment was intended to reduce the occurrence of premature responding (i.e. responding prior to conscious perception), and to identify instances where participants’ attention had been suboptimal. We excluded from analysis any trials where the line orientation judgement was incorrect. However, theoretically this still leaves open the possibility that the analysed trials contained some instances where participants responded prematurely but correctly guessed the line orientation; any such trials would contaminate the RTs as a pure indicator of conscious breakthrough. Given that the line orientation decisions were not accompanied by confidence judgments, it is not possible to directly identify accurately guessed responses. However, if guessing of the line orientation was a common occurrence, then we would reasonably expect the accuracy of the line orientation judgements to be substantially reduced. Given the observed accuracy was 88 and 91% in Experiments 1 and 2, respectively, we feel reassured that the potential contribution from accurate guesses is likely to have been negligible.

In conclusion, in two experiments we investigated the effect of valid sensorimotor predictions on conscious experience, measured through breaking interocular suppression. The combined data from the two experiments provides strong evidence that preparing a cue-congruent action results in more rapid reported conscious perception of the suppressed stimuli. This provides evidence for a key theoretical implication of the action-oriented predictive processing approach to conscious perception, namely, that sensorimotor predictions shape conscious experience of the world.


Contributor Information

Lina I Skora, School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Pevensey Building, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK; Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK.

Anil K Seth, Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK; School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK; Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Program on Brain, Mind and Consciousness, 661 University Ave, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada.

Ryan B Scott, School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Pevensey Building, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK; Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK.


Falsification and consciousness

Johannes Kleiner, Erik Hoel — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8052953, CC BY 4.0.

The search for a scientific theory of consciousness should result in theories that are falsifiable. However, here we show that falsification is especially problematic for theories of consciousness. We formally describe the standard experimental setup for testing these theories. Based on a theory’s application to some physical system, such as the brain, testing requires comparing a theory’s predicted experience (given some internal observables of the system like brain imaging data) with an inferred experience (using report or behavior). If there is a mismatch between inference and prediction, a theory is falsified. We show that if inference and prediction are independent, it follows that any minimally informative theory of consciousness is automatically falsified. This is deeply problematic since the field’s reliance on report or behavior to infer conscious experiences implies such independence, so this fragility affects many contemporary theories of consciousness. Furthermore, we show that if inference and prediction are strictly dependent, it follows that a theory is unfalsifiable. This affects theories which claim consciousness to be determined by report or behavior. Finally, we explore possible ways out of this dilemma.


Introduction

Successful scientific fields move from exploratory studies and observations to the point where theories are proposed that can offer precise predictions. Within neuroscience, the attempt to understand consciousness has moved out of the exploratory stage and there are now a number of theories of consciousness capable of predictions that have been advanced by various authors (Koch et al. 2016).

At this point in the field’s development, falsification has become relevant. In general, scientific theories should strive to make testable predictions (Popper 1968). In the search for a scientific theory of consciousness, falsifiability must be considered explicitly as it is commonly assumed that consciousness itself cannot be directly observed, instead it can only be inferred based off of report or behavior.

Contemporary neuroscientific theories of consciousness first began to be proposed in the early 1990s (Crick 1994). Some have been based directly on neurophysiological correlates, such as proposing that consciousness is associated with neurons firing at a particular frequency (Crick and Koch 1990) or activity in some particular area of the brain like the claustrum (Crick and Koch 2005). Other theories have focused more on the dynamics of neural processing, such as the degree of recurrent neural connectivity (Lamme 2006). Others yet have focused on the “global workspace” of the brain, based on how signals are propagated across different brain regions (Baars 1997). Specifically, Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) theory claims that consciousness is the result of an “avalanche” or “ignition” of widespread neural activity created by an interconnected but dispersed network of neurons with long-range connections (Sergent and Dehaene 2004).

Another avenue of research strives to derive a theory of consciousness from analysis of phenomenal experience. The most promising example thereof is Integrated Information Theory (IIT) (Tononi 2004, Oizumi et al. 2014). Historically, IIT is the first well-formalized theory of consciousness. It was the first (and arguably may still be the lone) theory that makes precise quantitative predictions about both the contents and level of consciousness (Tononi 2004). Specifically, the theory takes the form of a function, the input of which is data derived from some physical system’s internal observables, while the output of this function is predictions about the contents of consciousness (represented mathematically as an element of an experience space) and the level of consciousness (represented by a scalar value).

Both GNW and IIT have gained widespread popularity, sparked a general interest in consciousness, and have led to dozens if not hundreds of new empirical studies (Massimini et al. 2005; Del Cul et al. 2007; Dehaene and Changeux 2011; Gosseries et al. 2014; Wenzel et al. 2019). Indeed, there are already significant resources being spent attempting to falsify either GNW or IIT in the form of a global effort pre-registering predictions from the two theories so that testing can be conducted in controlled circumstances by researchers across the world (Ball 2019; Reardon 2019). We therefore often refer to both GNW and IIT as exemplar theories within consciousness research and show how our results apply to both. However, our results and reasoning apply to most contemporary theories, e.g. (Lau and Rosenthal 2011; Chang et al. 2019), particularly in their ideal forms. Note that we refer to both “theories” of consciousness and also “models” of consciousness, and use these interchangeably (Seth 2007).

Due to IIT’s level of formalization as a theory, it has triggered the most in-depth responses, expansions, and criticisms (Cerullo 2015; Bayne 2018; Mediano et al. 2019; Kleiner and Tull 2020) since well-formalized theories are much easier to criticize than nonformalized theories. Recently, one criticism levied against IIT was based on how the theory predicts feedforward neural networks have zero and recurrent neural networks have nonzero. Since a given recurrent neural network can be “unfolded” into a feedforward one while preserving its output function, this has been argued to render IIT outside the realm of science (Doerig et al. 2019). Replies have criticized the assumptions which underlie the derivation of this argument (Tsuchiya et al. 2019; Kleiner 2020).

Here, we frame and expand concerns around testing and falsification of theories by examining a more general question: what are the conditions under which theories of consciousness (beyond IIT alone) can be falsified? We outline a parsimonious description of theory testing with minimal assumptions based on first principles. In this agnostic setup, falsifying a theory of consciousness is the result of finding a mismatch between the inferred contents of consciousness (usually based on report or behavior) and the contents of consciousness as predicted by the theory (based on the internal observables of the system under question).

This mismatch between prediction and inference is critical for an empirically meaningful scientific agenda, because a theory’s prediction of the state and content of consciousness on its own cannot be assessed. For instance, imagine a theory that predicts (based on internal observables like brain dynamics) that a subject is seeing an image of a cat. Without any reference to report or outside information, there can be no falsification of this theory, since it cannot be assessed whether the subject was actually seeing a “dog” rather than “cat.” Falsifying a theory of consciousness is based on finding such mismatches between reported experiences and predictions.

In the following work, we formalize this by describing the prototypical experimental setup for testing a theory of consciousness. We come to a surprising conclusion: a widespread experimental assumption implies that most contemporary theories of consciousness are already falsified.

The assumption in question is the independence of an experimenter’s inferences about consciousness from a theory’s predictions. To demonstrate the problems this independence creates for contemporary theories, we introduce a “substitution argument.” This argument is based on the fact that many systems are equivalent in their reports (e.g. their outputs are identical for the same inputs), and yet their internal observables may differ greatly. This argument constitutes both a generalization and correction of the “unfolding argument” against IIT presented in Doerig et al. (2019). Examples of such substitutions may involve substituting a brain with a Turing machine or a cellular automaton since both types of systems are capable of universal computation (Turing 1937; Wolfram 1984) and hence may emulate the brain’s responses, or replacing a deep neural network with a single-layer neural network, since both types of networks can approximate any given function (Hornik et al. 1989; Schäfer and Zimmermann 2006).

Crucially, our results do not imply that falsifications are impossible. Rather, they show that the independence assumption implies that whenever there is an experiment where a theory’s predictions based on internal observables and a system’s reports agree, there exists also an actual physical system that falsifies the theory. One consequence is that the “unfolding argument” concerning IIT (Doerig et al. 2019) is merely a small subset of a much larger issue that affects all contemporary theories which seek to make predictions about experience off of internal observables. Our conclusion shows that if independence holds, all such theories come falsified a priori. Thus, instead of putting the blame of this problem on individual theories of consciousness, we show that it is due to issues of falsification in the scientific study of consciousness, particularly the field’s contemporary usage of report or behavior to infer conscious experiences.

A simple response to avoid this problem is to claim that report and inference are not independent. This is the case, e.g., in behaviorist theories of consciousness, but arguably also in Global Workspace Theory (Baars 2005), the “attention schema” theory of consciousness (Graziano and Webb 2015) or “fame in the brain” (Dennett 1991) proposals. We study this answer in detail and find that making a theory’s predictions and an experimenter’s inferences strictly dependent leads to pathological unfalsifiability.

Our results show that if the independence of prediction and inference holds true, as in contemporary cases where report about experiences is relied upon, it is likely that no current theory of consciousness is correct. Alternatively, if the assumption of independence is rejected, theories rapidly become unfalsifiable. While this dilemma may seem like a highly negative conclusion, we take it to show that our understanding of testing theories of consciousness may need to change to deal with these issues.


Formal Description of Testing Theories

Here, we provide a formal framework for experimentally testing a particular class of theories of consciousness. The class we consider makes predictions about the conscious experience of physical systems based on observations or measurements. This class describes many contemporary theories, including leading theories such as IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014), GNW Theory (Dehaene and Changeux 2004), Predictive Processing [when applied to account for conscious experience (Hohwy 2012; Hobson et al. 2014; Seth 2014; Clark 2019; Dolega and Dewhurst 2020)], or Higher Order Thought Theory (Rosenthal 2002). These theories may be motivated in different ways, or contain different formal structures, such as e.g., the ones of category theory (Tsuchiya et al. 2016). In some cases, contemporary theories in this class may lack the specificity to actually make precise predictions in their current form. Therefore, the formalisms we introduce may sometimes describe a more advanced form of a theory, one that can actually make predictions.

In the following section, we introduce the necessary terms to define how to falsify this class of theories: how the measurement of a physical system’s observables results in datasets (Experiments section), how a theory makes use of those datasets to offer predictions about consciousness (Predictions section), how an experimenter makes inferences about a physical system’s experiences (Inferences section), and finally how falsification of a theory occurs when there is a mismatch between a theory’s prediction and an experimenter’s inference (Falsification section). In Summary section, we give a summary of the introduced terms. In subsequent sections, we explore the consequences of this setup, such as how all contemporary theories are already falsified if the data used by inferences and predictions are independent, and also how theories are unfalsifiable if this is changed to a strict form of dependency.


Experiments

All experimental attempts to either falsify or confirm a member of the class of theories we consider begin by examining some particular physical system which has some specific physical configuration, state, or dynamics, p. This physical system is part of a class P of such systems which could have been realized, in principle, in the experiment. For example, in IIT, the class of systems P may be some Markov chains, set of logic gates, or neurons in the brain, and every denotes that system being in a particular state at some time t. On the other hand, for GNW, P might comprise the set of long-range cortical connections that make up the global workspace of the brain, with p being the activity of that global workspace at that time.

Testing a physical system necessitates experiments or observations. For instance, neuroimaging tools like fMRI or EEG have to be used in order to obtain information about the brain. This information is used to create datasets such as functional networks, wiring diagrams, models, or transition probability matrices. To formalize this process, we denote by all possible datasets that can result from observations of P. Each is one particular dataset, the result of carrying out some set of measurements on p. We denote the datasets that can result from measurements on p as. Formally: where is a correspondence, which is a “generalized function” that allows more than one element in the image (functions are a special case of correspondences). A correspondence is necessary because, for a given p, various possible datasets may arise, e.g., due to different measurement techniques such as fMRI vs. EEG, or due to the stochastic behavior of the system, or due to varying experimental parameters. In the real world, data obtained from experiments may be incomplete or noisy, or neuroscientific findings difficult to reproduce (Gilmore et al. 2017). Thus for every, there is a whole class of datasets which can result from the experiment.

Note that describes the experiment, the choice of observables, and all conditions during an experiment that generates the dataset o necessary to apply the theory, which may differ from theory to theory, such as interventions in the case of IIT. In all realistic cases, the correspondence is likely quite complicated since it describes the whole experimental setup. For our argument, it simply suffices that this mapping exists, even if it is not known in detail.

It is also worth noting here that all leading neuroscientific theories of consciousness, from IIT to GNW, assume that experiences are not observable or directly measurable when applying the theory to physical systems. That is, experiences themselves are never identified or used in but are rather inferred based on some dataset o that contains report or other behavioral indicators.

Next, we explore how the datasets in are used to make predictions about the experience of a physical system.


Predictions

A theory of consciousness makes predictions about the experience of some physical system in some configuration, state, or dynamics, p, based on some dataset o. To this end, a theory carries within its definition a set or space E whose elements correspond to various different conscious experiences a system could have. The interpretation of this set varies from theory to theory, ranging from descriptions of the level of conscious experience in early versions of IIT, descriptions of the level and content of conscious experience in contemporary IIT (Kleiner and Tull 2020), or the description only of whether a presented stimuli is experienced in GNW or HOT. We sometimes refer to elements e of E simply as experiences.

Formally, this means that a prediction considers an experimental dataset (determined by obs) and specifies an element of the experience space E. We denote this as pred, for “prediction,” which is a map from to E. The details of how individual datasets are being used to make predictions again do not matter for the sake of our investigation. What matters is that a procedure exists, and this is captured by pred. However, we have to take into account that a single dataset may not predict only one single experience. In general, pred may only allow an experimenter to constrain experience of the system in that it only specifies a subset of all experiences a theory models. We denote this subset by. Thus, is also a correspondence

Shown in is the full set of terms needed to formally define how most contemporary theories of consciousness make predictions about the experience. So far, what we have said is very general. Indeed, the force and generalizability of our argument comes from the fact that we do not have to define pred explicitly for the various models we consider. It suffices that it exists, in some form or the other, for the models under consideration.

It is crucial to note that predicting states of consciousness alone does not suffice to test a model of consciousness. Some have previously criticized theories of consciousness, IIT in particular, just based off of their counter-intuitive predictions. An example is the criticism that relatively simply grid-like networks have high (Aaronson 2014; Tononi 2014). However, debates about counter-intuitive predictions are not meaningful by themselves, since alone does not contain enough information to say whether a theory is true or false. The most a theory could be criticized for is either not fitting our own phenomenology or not being parsimonious enough, neither of which are necessarily violated by counter-intuitive predictions. For example, it may actually be parsimonious to assume that many physical systems have consciousness (Goff 2017). That is, speculation about acceptable predictions by theories of consciousness must implicitly rely on a comparative reference to be meaningful, and speculations that are not explicit about their reference are uninformative.


Inferences

As discussed in the previous section, a theory is unfalsifiable given just predictions alone, and so pred must be compared to something else. Ideally, this would be the actual conscious experience of the system under investigation. However, as noted previously, the class of theories we focus on here assumes that experience itself is not part of the observables. For this reason, the experience of a system must be inferred separately from a theory’s prediction to create a basis of comparison. Most commonly, such inferences are based on reports. For instance, an inference might be based on an experimental participant reporting on the switching of some perceptually bistable image (Blake et al. 2014) or on reports about seen vs. unseen images in masking paradigms (Alais et al. 2010).

It has been pointed out that report in a trial may interfere with the actual isolation of consciousness, and there has recently been the introduction of so-called “no-report paradigms” (Tsuchiya et al. 2015). In these cases, report is first correlated to some autonomous phenomenon like optokinetic nystagmus (stereotyped eye movement), and then the experimenter can use this instead of the subject’s direct reports to infer their experiences. Indeed, there can even be simpler cases where report is merely assumed: e.g., that in showing a red square, a participant will experience a red square without necessarily asking the participant since previously that participant has proved compos mentis. Similarly, in cases of nonhumans incapable of verbal report, “report” can be broadly construed as behavior or output.

All these cases can be broadly described as being a case of inference off of some data. These data might be actual reports (like a participant’s button pushes) or may be based off of physiological reactions (like no-report paradigms) or may be the outputs of a neural network or set of logic gates, such as the results of an image classification task (LeCun et al. 2015). Therefore, the inference can be represented as a function, between a dataset o generated by observation or measurement of the physical system, and the set of postulated experiences in the model of consciousness, E:

Defining as a function means that we assume that for every experimental dataset o, one single experience in E is inferred during the experiment. Here, we use a function instead of a correspondence for technical and formal ease, which does not affect our results: if two correspondences to the same space are given, one of them can be turned into a function. (If is a correspondence, one defines a new space by. Every individual element of this space describes exactly what can be inferred from one dataset, so that is a function. The correspondence is then redefined, for every, by the requirement that iff for some.) The inf function is flexible enough to encompass both direct report, no-report, input/output analysis, and also assumed-report cases. It is a mapping that describes the process of inferring the conscious experience of a system from data recorded in the experiments. Both inf and pred are depicted in.

It is worth noting that we have used here the same class as in the definition of the prediction mapping above. This makes sense because the inference process also uses data obtained in experimental trials, such as reports by a subject. So both pred and inf can be described to operate on the same total dataset measured, even though they usually use different parts of this dataset (cf. below).


Falsification

We have now introduced all elements which are necessary to formally say what a falsification of a theory of consciousness is. To falsify, a theory of consciousness requires mismatch between an experimenter’s inference (generally based on report) and the predicted consciousness of the subject. In order to describe this, we consider some particular experimental trial, as well as and. There is a falsification at if we haveThis definition can be spelled out in terms of individual components of E. To this end, for any given dataset, let denote the experience that is being inferred, and let be one of the experiences that is predicted based off of some dataset. Then (2) simply states that we have for all possible predictions ep. None of the predicted states of experience is equal to the inferred experience.What does mean? There are two cases which are possible. Either, the prediction based on the theory of consciousness is correct, and the inferred experience is wrong. Or the prediction is wrong, so that in this case the model would be falsified. In short: either the prediction process or the inference process is wrong.We remark that if there is a dataset o on which the inference procedure or the prediction procedure cannot be used, then this dataset cannot be used in falsifying a model of consciousness. Thus, when it comes to falsifications, we can restrict to datasets o for which both procedures are defined.In order to understand in more detail what is going on if (2) holds, we have to look into a single dataset. This will be of use later.Generally, and will make use of different part of the data obtained in an experimental trial. For example, in the context of IIT or GNW, data about the internal structure and state of the brain will be used for the prediction. These data can be obtained from an fMRI scan or EEG measurement. The state of consciousness on the other hand can be inferred from verbal reports. Pictorially, we may represent this as in. We use the following notation: oi For a chosen dataset, we denote the part of the dataset which is used for the prediction process by oi (for “internal” data). This can be thought of as data about the internal workings of the system. We call oi the prediction data in o.or For a chosen dataset, we denote the part of the dataset which is used for inferring the state of experience by or (for “report” data). We call it the inference data in o.Note that in both cases, the subscript can be read similarly as the notation for restricting a set. We remark that a different kind of prediction could be considered as well, where one makes use of the inverse of. In Appendix B, we prove that this is in fact equivalent to the case considered here, so that Definition 2.1 indeed covers the most general situation.


The Substitution Argument

Substitutions are changes of physical systems (i.e. the substitution of one for another) that leave the inference data invariant, but may change the result of the prediction process. A specific case of substitution, the unfolding of a reentrant neural network to a feedforward one, was recently applied to IIT to argue that IIT cannot explain consciousness (Doerig et al. 2019).

Here, we show that, in general, the contemporary notion of falsification in the science of consciousness exhibits this fundamental flaw for almost all contemporary theories, rather than being a problem for a particular theory. This flaw is based on the independence between the data used for inferences about consciousness (like reports) and the data used to make predictions about consciousness. We discuss various responses to this flaw in Objections section.

We begin by defining what a substitution is in Substitutions section, show that it implies falsifications in Substitutions imply falsifications section and analyze the particularly problematic case of universal substitutions in Universal substitutions imply complete falsification section. In When does a universal substitution exist? section, we prove that universal substitutions exist if prediction and inference data are independent and give some examples of already-known cases.


Substitutions

In order to define formally what a substitution is, we work with the inference content or of a dataset o as introduced in Falsification section. We first denote the class of all physical configurations which could have produced the inference content or upon measurement by. Using the correspondence which describes the relation between physical systems and measurement results, this can be defined as where denotes all possible datasets that can be measured if the system p is under investigation and where is a shorthand for with inference content or.

Any map of the form takes a system configuration p which can produce inference content or to another system’s configuration S(p) which can produce the same inference content. This allows us to define what a substitution is formally. In what follows, the indicates the composition of the correspondences and to give a correspondence from P to E, which could also be denoted as (That is, it is the image under of the set.), and denotes the intersection of sets. There is a or-substitution if there is a transformation such that at least for one In words, a substitution requires there to be a transformation S which keeps the inference data constant but changes the prediction of the system. So much in fact that the prediction of the original configuration p and of the transformed configuration S(p) are fully incompatible, i.e. there is no single experience e which is contained in both predictions. Given some inference data or, an or-substitution then requires this to be the case for at least one system configuration p that gives this inference data. In other words, the transformation S is such that for at least one p, the predictions change completely, while the inference content or is preserved.A pictorial definition of substitutions is given in. We remark that if and were functions, so that only contained one element, would be equivalent to.We will find below that the really problematic case arises if there is an or-substitution for every possible inference content or. We refer to this case as a universal substitution.

There is a universal substitution if there is an or-substitution for every or.

We recall that according to the notation introduced in Falsification section, the inference content of any dataset is denoted by or (adding the subscript r). Thus, the requirement is that there is an or-substitution for every inference data that can pertain in the experiment under consideration (for every inference data that is listed in). The subscript or of indicates that the transformation S in Definition 3.1 can be chosen differently for different or. Definition 3.2 does not require there to be one single transformation that works for all or.


Substitutions imply falsifications

The force of our argument comes from the fact that if there are substitutions, then this necessarily leads to mismatches between inferences and predictions. This is shown by the following lemma. If there is a or-substitution, there is a falsification at some.Proof. Let p be the physical system in Definition 3.1 and define. Let be a dataset of p which has inference content or and let be a dataset of which has the same inference content or, guaranteed to exist by the definition of in (3). implies that Since, however, we have. Thus we have either or, or both. Thus there is either a falsification at o, a falsification at, or both. □The last lemma shows that if there are substitutions, then there are necessarily falsifications. This might, however, not be considered too problematic, since it could always be the case that the model is right whereas the inferred experience is wrong. Inaccessible predictions are not unusual in science. A fully problematic case only pertains for universal substitutions, i.e., if there is an or-substitution for every inference content or that can arise in an experiment under consideration.


Universal substitutions imply complete falsification

In Falsification section, we have defined falsifications for individual datasets. Using the “insight view” of single datasets, we can refine this definition somewhat by relating it to the inference content only. There is an or-falsification if there is a falsification for some which has inference content or.This definition is weaker than the original definition, because among all datasets which have inference content or, only one needs to exhibit a falsification. Using this notion, the next lemma specifies the exact relation between substitutions and falsifications.If there is an or-substitution, there is an or-falsification.Proof. This lemma follows directly from the proof of Lemma 3.3 because the datasets o and used in that proof both have inference content or. □This finally allows us to show our first main result. It shows that if a universal substitution exists, the theory of consciousness under consideration is falsified. We explain the meaning of this proposition after the proof.If there is a universal substitution, there is an or-falsification for all possible inference contents or.Proof. By definition of universal substitution, there is an or-substitution for every or. Thus, the claim follows directly from Lemma 3.5. □In combination with Definition 3.4, this proposition states that for every possible report (or any other type of inference procedure, cf. our use of terminology in Falsification section), there is a dataset o which contains the report’s data and for which we have where we have slightly abused notation in writing instead of for clarity. This implies that one of two cases needs to pertain: either at least one of the inferred experiences is correct, in which case the corresponding prediction is wrong and the theory needs to be considered falsified. The only other option is that for all inference contents or, the prediction is correct, which qua (6) implies that no single inference points at the correct experience, so that the inference procedure is completely wrong. This shows that Proposition 3.6 can equivalently be stated as follows.If there is a universal substitution, either every single inference operation is wrong or the theory under consideration is already falsified.Next, we discuss under which circumstances a universal substitution exists.


When does a universal substitution exist?

In the last section, we have seen that if a universal substitution exists, this has strong consequences. In this section, we discuss under what conditions universal substitutions exist.


Theories need to be minimally informative

We have taken great care above to make sure that our notion of prediction is compatible with incomplete or noisy datasets. This is the reason why is a correspondence, the most general object one could consider. For the purpose of this section, we add a gentle assumption which restricts slightly: we assume that every prediction carries at least a minimal amount of information. In our case, this means that for every prediction, there is at least one other prediction which is different from. Put in simple terms, this means that we do not consider theories of consciousness which have only a single prediction.

In order to take this into account, for every, we define, which comprises exactly all those datasets which can be generated by physical systems p that also generate o. When applying our previous definitions, this can be fleshed out as

Using this, we can state our minimal information assumption in a way that is compatible with the general setup displayed in:

We assume that the theories of consciousness under consideration are minimally informative in that for every, there exists an such that


Inference and prediction data are independent

We have already noted, that in most experiments, the prediction content oi and inference content or consist of different parts of a dataset. What is more, they are usually assumed to be independent, in the sense that changes in oi are possible while keeping or constant. This is captured by the next definition. Inference and prediction data are independent if for any oi, and or, there is a variationsuch that but and for some.Here, we use the same shorthand as in (3). For example, the requirement is a shorthand for there being an which has prediction content oi. The variation ν in this definition is a variation in P, which describes physical systems which could, in principle, have been realized in an experiment (cf. Summary section). We note that a weaker version of this definition can be given which still implies our results below, cf. Appendix A. Note that if inference and prediction data are not independent, e.g., because they have a common cause, problems of tautologies loom large, cf. Objections section. Throughout the text, we often refer to Definition 3.8 simply as “independence.”


Universal substitutions exist

Combining the last two sections, we can now prove that universal substitutions exist. If inference and prediction data are independent, universal substitutions exist.Proof. To show that a universal substitution exists, we need to show that for every, an or-substitution exists (Definition 3.1). Thus assume that an arbitrary is given. The minimal information assumption guarantees that there is an such that holds. As before, we denote the prediction content of o and by oi and, respectively, and the inference content of o by or.Since inference and prediction data are independent, there exists a as well as a such that and. By Definition (7), the first two of these four conditions imply that and. Thus, applies and allows us to conclude that Via, the latter two of the four conditions imply that and. Thus, we may restrict ν to to obtain a map which in light of the first part of this proof exhibits at least one which satisfies (4). Thus we have shown that an or-substitution exists. Since o was arbitrary, it follows that a universal substitution exists. □The intuition behind this proof is very simple. In virtue of our assumption that theories of consciousness need to be minimally informative, for any dataset o, there is another dataset which makes a nonoverlapping prediction. But in virtue of inference and prediction data being independent, we can find a variation that changes the prediction content as prescribed by o and but keeps the inference content constant. This suffices to show that there exists a transformation S as required by the definition of a substitution.Combining this result with Proposition 3.7, we finally can state our main theorem.If inference and prediction data are independent, either every single inference operation is wrong or the theory under consideration is already falsified.Proof. The theorem follows by combining Propositions 3.9 and 3.7. □In the next section, we give several examples of universal substitutions, before discussing various possible responses to our result in Objections section.


Examples of data independence

Our main theorem shows that testing a theory of consciousness will necessarily lead to its falsification if inference and prediction data are independent (Definition 3.8), and if at least one single inference can be trusted (Theorem 3.10). In this section, we give several examples that illustrate the independence of inference and prediction data. We take report to mean output, behavior, or verbal report itself and assume that prediction data derives from internal measurements.

Artificial neural networks. ANNs, particularly those trained using deep learning, have grown increasingly powerful and capable of human-like performance (LeCun et al. 2015; Bojarski et al. 2016). For any ANN, report (output) is a function of node states. Crucially, this function is noninjective, i.e., some nodes are not part of the output. For example, in deep learning, the report is typically taken to consist of the last layer of the ANN, while the hidden layers are not taken to be part of the output. Correspondingly, for any given inference data, one can construct a ANN with arbitrary prediction data by adding nodes, changing connections and changing those nodes which are not part of the output. Put differently, one can always substitute a given ANN with another with different internal observables but identical or near-identical reports. From a mathematical perspective, it is well-known that both feedforward ANNs and recurrent ANNs can approximate any given function (Hornik et al. 1989; Schäfer and Zimmermann 2007). Since reports are just some function, it follows that there are viable universal substitutions.

A special case thereof is the unfolding transformation considered in Doerig et al. (2019) in the context of IIT. The arguments in this article constitute a proof of the fact that for ANNs, inference and prediction data are independent (Definition 3.8). Crucially, our main theorem shows that this has implications for all minimally informative theories of consciousness. A similar result (using a different characterization of theories of consciousness than minimally informative) has been shown in Kleiner (2020).

Universal computers. Turing machines are extremely different in architecture than ANNs. Since they are capable of universal computation (Turing 1937), they should provide an ideal candidate for a universal substitution. Indeed, this is exactly the reasoning behind the Turing test of conversational artificial intelligence (Turing 1950). Therefore, if one believes it is possible for a sufficiently fast Turing machine to pass the Turing test, one needs to accept that substitutions exist. Notably, Turing machines are just one example of universal computation, and there are other instances of different parameter spaces or physical systems that are capable thereof, such as cellular automata (Wolfram 1984).

Universal intelligences. There are models of universal intelligence that allow for maximally intelligent behavior across any set of tasks (Hutter 2003). For instance, consider the AIXI model, the gold-standard for universal intelligence, which operates via Solomonoff induction (Solomonoff 1964; Hutter 2004). The AIXI model generates an optimal decision making over some class of problems, and methods linked to it have already been applied to a range of behaviors, such as creating “AI physicists” (Wu and Tegmark 2019). Its universality indicates it is a prime candidate for universal substitutions. Notably, unlike a Turing machine, it avoids issues of precisely how it is accomplishing universal substitution of report, since the algorithm that governs the AIXI model behavior is well-described and “relatively” simple.

The above are all real and viable classes of systems that are used everyday in science and engineering which all provide different viable universal substitutions if inferences are based on reports or outputs. They show that in normal experimental setups such as the ones commonly used in neuroscientific research into consciousness (Frith et al. 1999), inference and prediction data are indeed independent, and dependency is not investigated nor properly considered. It is always possible to substitute the physical system under consideration with another that has different internal observables, and therefore different predictions, but similar or identical reports. Indeed, recent research in using the work introduced in this work shows that even different spatiotemporal models of a system can be substituted for one another, leading to falsification (Hanson and Walker 2020). We have not considered possible but less reasonable examples of universal substitutions, like astronomically large look-up ledgers of reports.

As an example of our Main Theorem 3.10, we consider the case of IIT. Since the theory is normally applied in Boolean networks, logic gates, or artificial neural networks, one usually takes report to mean “output.” In this case, it has already been proven that systems with different internal structures and hence different predicted experiences, can have identical input/output (and therefore identical reports or inferences about report) (Albantakis and Tononi 2019). To take another case: within IIT it has already been acknowledged that a Turing machine may have a wildly different predicted contents of consciousness for the same behavior or reports (Koch 2019). Therefore, data independence during testing has already been shown to apply to IIT under its normal assumptions.


Inference and Prediction Data Are Strictly Dependent

An immediate response to our main result showing that many theories suffer from a priori falsification would be to claim that it offers support of theories which define conscious experience in terms of what is accessible to report. This is the case, e.g., for behaviorist theories of consciousness but might arguably also be the case for some interpretations of global workspace theory or fame in the brain proposals. In this section, we show that this response is not valid, as theories of this kind, where inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, are unfalsifiable.

In order to analyze this case, we first need to specifically outline how theories can be pathologically unfalsifiable. Clearly, the goal of the scientific study as a whole is to find, eventually, a theory of consciousness that are empirically adequate and therefore corroborated by all experimental evidence. Therefore, not being falsified in experiments is a necessary condition (though not sufficient) any purportedly “true” theory of consciousness needs to satisfy. Therefore, not being falsifiable by the set of possible experiments per se is not a bad thing. We seek to distinguish this from cases of unfasifiability due to pathological assumptions that underlie a theory of consciousness, assumptions which render an experimental investigation meaningless. Specifically, a pathological dependence between inferences and predictions leads to theories which are unfalsifiable.

Such unfalsifiable theories can be identified neatly in our formalism. To see how, recall that denotes the class of all datasets that can result from an experiment investigating the physical systems in the class P. Put differently, it contains all datasets that could, in principle, appear when probed in the experiment. This is not the class of all possible datasets of type one can think of. Many datasets which are of the same form as elements of might simply not arise in the experiment under consideration. We denote the class of all possible datasets as:

Intuitively, in terms of possible worlds semantics, describes the datasets which could appear, for the type of experiment under consideration, in the actual world., in contrast, describes the datasets which could appear in this type of experiment in any possible world. For example, contains datasets which can only occur if consciousness attaches to the physical in a different way than it actually does in the actual word.

By construction, is a subset of, which describes which among the possible datasets actually arises across experimental trials. Hence, also determines which theory of consciousness is compatible with (i.e. not falsified by) experimental investigation. However, defines all possible datasets independent of any constraint by real empirical results, i.e., all possible imaginable datasets.

Introduction of allows us to distinguish the pathological cases of unfalsifiability mentioned above. Whereas any purportedly true theory should only fail to be falsified with respect to the experimental data, a pathological unfalsifiability pertains if a theory cannot be falsified at all, i.e. over. This is captured by the following definition. A theory of consciousness which does not have a falsification over is empirically unfalsifiable.Here, we use the term “empirically unfalsifiable” to highlight and refer to the pathological notion of unfalsifiability. Intuitively speaking, a theory which satisfies this definition appears to be true independently of any experimental investigation, and without the need for any such investigation. Using, we can also define the notion of strict dependence in a useful way.Inference and prediction data are strictly dependent if there is a function f such that for any, we have.This definition says that there exists a function f which for every possible inference data or allows to deduce the prediction data oi. We remark that the definition refers to and not, as the dependence of inference and prediction considered here holds by assumption and is not simply asserting a contingency in nature.The definition is satisfied, e.g., if inference data is equal to prediction data, i.e., if oi = or, where f is simply the identity. This is the case, e.g., for behaviorist theories (Skinner 1938) of consciousness, where consciousness is equated directly with report or behavior, or for precursors of functionalist theories of consciousness that are based on behavior or input/output (Putnam 1960). The definition is also satisfied in the case where prediction data are always a subset of the inference data: Here, f is simply the restriction function. This arguably applies to global workspace theory (Baars 2005), the “attention schema” theory of consciousness (Graziano and Webb 2015) or “fame in the brain” (Dennett 1991) proposals.In all these cases, consciousness is generated by—and hence needs to be predicted via—what is accessible to report or output. In terms of Block’s distinction between phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness (Block 1996), holds true whenever a theory of consciousness is under investigation where access consciousness determines phenomenal consciousness.Our second main theorem is the following.If a theory of consciousness implies that inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, then it is either already falsified or empirically unfalsifiable.Proof. To prove the theorem, it is useful to consider the inference and prediction content of datasets explicitly. The possible pairings that can occur in an experiment are given by where we have again used our notation that oi denotes the prediction data of o, and similar for or. To define the possible pairings that can occur in, we let denote the class of all prediction contents that arise in, and denote the class of all inference contents that arise in. The set of all conceivable pairings is then given by Crucially, here, oi and do not have to be part of the same dataset o. Combined with Definition 2.1, we conclude that there is a falsification over if for some, we have, and there is a falsification over if for some, we have.Next we show that if inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, then holds. We start with the set as defined in (12). Expanding this definition in words, it reads where we have symbols di and dr to denote prediction and inference data independently of any dataset o.Assume that the first condition in this expression, dr = or holds for some. Since inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, we have. Furthermore, for the same reason, the prediction content oi of the dataset o satisfies. Applying the function f to both sides of the first condition gives, which thus in turn implies oi = di. This means that the o that satisfies the first condition in (14) automatically also satisfies the second condition. Therefore, due to inference and prediction data being strictly dependent, (14) is equivalent to This, however, is exactly as defined in (11). Thus we conclude that if inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, necessarily holds.Returning to the characterization of falsification in terms of and above, what we have just found implies that there is a falsification over if and only if there is a falsification over. Thus either there is a falsification over, in which case the theory is already falsified or there is no falsification over, in which case the theory under consideration is empirically unfalsifiable. □The gist of this proof is that if inference and prediction data are strictly dependent, then as far as the inference and prediction contents go, and are the same. That is, the experiment does not add anything to the evaluation of the theory. It is sufficient to know only all possible datasets to decide whether there is a falsification.
In practise, this would mean that knowledge of the experimental design (which reports are to be collected, on the one hand, which possible data a measurement device can produce, one the other) is sufficient to evaluate the theory, which is clearly at odds with the role of empirical evidence required in any scientific investigation. Thus, such theories are empirically unfalsifiable.To give an intuitive example of the theorem, let us examine a theory that uses the information accessible to report in a system to predict conscious experience (perhaps this information is “famous” in the brain or is within some accessible global workspace). In terms of our notation, we can assume that or denotes everything that is accessible to report, and oi denotes that part which is used by the theory to predict conscious experience. Thus, in this case we have. Since the predicted contents are always part of what can be reported, there can never be any mismatch between reports and predictions. However, this is not only the case for but also, in virtue of the theory’s definition, for all possible datasets, i.e.,. Therefore, such theories are empirically unfalsifiable. Experiments add no information to whether the theory is true or not, and such theories are empirically uninformative or tautological.


Objections

In this section, we discuss a number of possible objections to our results.


Restricting inferences to humans only

The examples given in section 3.4.4 show that data independence holds during the usual testing setups. This is because prima facie it seems reasonable to base inferences either on report capability or intelligent behavior in a manner agnostic of the actual physical makeup of the system. Yet this entails independence, so in these cases our conclusions apply.

One response to our results might be to restrict all testing of theories of consciousness solely to humans. In our formalisms, this is equivalent to making the strength of inferences based not on reports themselves but on an underlying biological homology. Such an inf function may still pick out specific experiences via reports, but the weight of the inference is carried by homology rather than report or behavior. This would mean that the substitution argument does not significantly affect consciousness research, as reports of nonhuman systems would simply not count. Theories of consciousness, so this idea goes, would be supported by abductive reasoning from testing in humans alone.

Overall, there are strong reasons to reject this restriction of inferences. One significant issue is that this objection is equivalent to saying that reports or behavior in nonhumans carry no information about consciousness, an incredibly strong claim. Indeed, this is highly problematic for consciousness research which often uses nonhuman animal models (Boly et al. 2013). For instance, cephalopods are among the most intelligent animals yet are quite distant on the tree of life from humans and have a distinct neuroanatomy, and still are used for consciousness research (Mather 2008). Even in artificial intelligence research, there is increasing evidence that deep neural networks produced brain-like structures such as grid cells, shape tuning, and visual illusions, and many others (Richards et al. 2019). Given these similarities, it becomes questionable why the strength of inferences should be based on homology instead of capability of report or intelligence.

What is more, restricting inferences to humans alone is unlikely to be sufficient to avoid our results. Depending on the theory under consideration, data independence might exist just in human brains alone. That is, it is probable that there are transformations (as in) available within the brain wherein or is fixed but oi varies. This is particularly true once one allows for interventions on the human brain by experimenters, such as perturbations like transcranial magnetic stimulation, which is already used in consciousness research (Rounis et al. 2010; Napolitani et al. 2014).

For these reasons this objection does not appear viable. At minimum, it is clear that if the objection were taken seriously, it would imply significant changes to consciousness research which would make the field extremely restricted with strong a priori assumptions.


Reductio ad absurdum

Another hypothetical objection to our results is to argue that they could just as well be applied to scientific theories in other fields. If this turned out to be true, this would not imply our argument is necessarily incorrect. But, the fact that other scientific theories do not seem especially problematic with regard to falsification would generate the question of whether some assumption is illegitimately strong. In order to address this, we explain which of our assumptions is specific to theories of consciousness and would not hold when applied to other scientific theories. Subsequently, we give an example to illustrate this point.

The assumption in question is that, the class of all datasets that can result from observations or measurements of a system, is determined by the physical configurations in P alone. That is, every single dataset o, including both its prediction content oi and its inference content or, is determined by p, and not by a conscious experience in E. In, this is reflected in the fact that there is an arrow from P to, but no arrow from E to.

This assumption expresses the standard paradigm of testing theories of consciousness in neuroscience, according to which both the data used to predict a state of consciousness and the reports of a system are determined by its physical configuration alone. This, in turn, may be traced back to consciousness’ assumed subjective and private nature, which implies that any empirical access to states of consciousness in scientific investigations is necessarily mediated by a subject’s reports, and to general physicalist assumptions.

This is different from experiments in other natural sciences. If there are two quantities of interest whose relation is to be modeled by a scientific theory, then in all reasonable cases there are two independent means of collecting information relevant to a test of the theory, one providing a dataset that is determined by the first quantity, and one providing a dataset that is determined by the second quantity.

Consider, as an example, the case of temperature T and its relation to microphysical states. To apply our argument, the temperature T would replace the experience space E and p would denote a microphysical configuration. In order to test any particular theory about how temperature is determined by microphysical states, one would make use of two different measurements. The first measurement would access the microphysical states and would allow measurement of, say, the mean kinetic energy (if that’s what the theory under consideration utilizes). This first measurement would provide a dataset om that replaces the prediction data oi above. For the second measurement, one would use a thermometer or some other measuring device to obtain a dataset ot that replaces our inference data or above. Comparison of the inferred temperature with the temperature that is predicted based on om would allow testing of the theory under consideration. These independent means provide independent access to each of the two datasets in question. Combining om and ot in one dataset o, the diagrammatic representation is which differs from the case of theories of consciousness considered here, wherein the physical system determines both datasets.


Theories could be based on phenomenology

Another response to the issue of independence/dependence identified here is to propose that a theory of consciousness may not have to be falsified but can be judged by other characteristics. This is reminiscent of ideas put forward in connection with String Theory, which some have argued can be judged by elegance or parsimony alone (Carroll 2018).

In addition to elegance and parsimony, in consciousness science, one could in particular consider a theory’s fit with phenomenology, i.e., how well a theory describes the general structure of conscious experience. Examples of theories that are constructed based on a fit with phenomenology are recent versions of IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014) or any view that proposes developing theories based on isomorphisms between the structure of experiences and the structure of physical systems or processes (Tsuchiya et al. 2019).

It might be suggested that phenomenological theories might be immune to aspects of the issues we outline in our results (Negro 2020). We emphasize that in order to avoid our results, and indeed the need for any experimental testing at all, a theory constructed from phenomenology has to be uniquely derivable from conscious experience. However, to date, no such derivation exists, as phenomenology seems to generally underdetermine the postulates of IIT (Bayne 2018; Barrett and Mediano 2019), and because it is unknown what the scope and nature of nonhuman experience is. Therefore, theories based on phenomenology can only confidently identify systems with human-like conscious experiences and cannot currently do so uniquely. Thus they cannot avoid the need for testing.

As long as no unique and correct derivation exists across the space of possible conscious experiences, the use of experimental tests to assess theories of consciousness, and hence our results, cannot be avoided.


Rejecting falsifiability

Another response to our findings might be to deny the importance of falsifications within the scientific methodology. Such responses may reference a Lakatosian conception of science, according to which science does not proceed by discarding theories immediately upon falsification, but instead consists of research programs built around a family of theories (Lakatos 1980). These research programs have a protective belt which consists of nonessential assumptions that are required to make predictions, and which can easily be modified in response to falsifications, as well as a hard core that is immune to falsifications. Within the Lakatosian conception of science research programs are either progressive or degenerating based on whether they can “anticipate theoretically novel facts in its growth” or not (Lakatos 1980).

It is important to note, however, that Lakatos does not actually break with falsificationism. This is why Lakatos description of science is often called “refined falsificationism” in philosophy of science (Radnitzky 1991). Thus cases of testing theories’ predictions remain relevant in a Lakatosian view in order to distinguish between progressive and degenerating research programs. Therefore, our results generally translate into this view of scientific progress. In particular, Theorem 3.10 shows that for every single inference procedure that is taken to be valid, there exists a system for which the theory makes a wrong prediction. This implies necessarily that a research program is degenerating. That is, independence implies that there is always an available substitution that can falsify any particular prediction coming from the research program.


Conclusion

In this article, we have subjected the usual scheme for testing theories of consciousness to a thorough formal analysis. We have shown that there appear to be deep problems inherent in this scheme which need to be addressed.

Crucially, in contrast to other similar results (Doerig et al. 2019), we do not put the blame on individual theories of consciousness, but rather show that a key assumption that is usually being made is responsible for the problems: an experimenter’s inference about consciousness and a theory’s predictions are generally implicitly assumed to be independent during testing across contemporary theories. As we formally prove, if this independence holds, substitutions or changes to physical systems are possible that falsify any given contemporary theory. Whenever there is an experimental test of a theory of consciousness on some physical system which does not lead to a falsification, there necessary exists another physical system which, if it had been tested, would have produced a falsification of that theory. We emphasize that this problem does not only affect one particular type of theory, e.g., those based on causal interactions like IIT; theorems apply to all contemporary neuroscientific theories of consciousness if independence holds.

In the second part of our results, we examine the case where independence does not hold. We show that if an experimenter’s inferences about consciousness and a theory’s predictions are instead considered to be strictly dependent, empirical unfalsifiability follows, which renders any type of experiment to test a theory uninformative. This affects all theories wherein consciousness is predicted off of reports or behavior (such as behaviorism), theories based off of input/output functions, and also theories that equate consciousness with on accessible or reportable information.

Thus, theories of consciousness seem caught between Scylla and Charybdis, requiring delicate navigation. In our opinion, there may only be two possible paths forward to avoid these dilemmas, which we briefly outline below. Each requires a revision of the current scheme of testing or developing theories of consciousness.


Lenient dependency

When combined, our main theorems show that both independence and strict dependence of inference and prediction data are problematic and thus neither can be assumed in an experimental investigation. This raises the question of whether there are reasonable cases where inference and prediction are dependent, but not strictly dependent.

A priori, in the space of possible relationships between inference and prediction data, there seems to be room for relationships that are neither independent (The substitution argument section) nor strictly dependent (Inference and prediction data are strictly dependent section). We define this relationships of this kind as cases of lenient dependency. No current theory or testing paradigm that we know of satisfies this definition. Yet cases of lenient dependency cannot be excluded to exist. Such cases would technically not be beholden to either Theorem 3.10 or Theorem 4.3.

There seems to be two general possibilities of how lenient dependencies could be built. On the one hand, one could hope to find novel forms of inference that allow to surpass the problems we have identified here. This would likely constitute a major change in the methodologies of experimental testing of theories of consciousness. On the other hand, another possibility to attain lenient dependence would be to construct theories of consciousness which yield prediction functions that are designed to explicitly have a leniently dependent link to inference functions. This would likely constitute a major change in constructing theories of consciousness.


Physics is not causally closed

Another way to avoid our conclusion is to only consider theories of consciousness which do not describe the physical as causally closed (Kim 1998). That is, the presence or absence of a particular experience itself would have to make a difference to the configuration, dynamics, or states of physical systems above and beyond what would be predicted with just information about the physical system itself. If a theory of consciousness does not describe the physical as closed, a whole other range of predictions are possible: predictions which concern the physical domain itself, e.g., changes in the dynamics of the system which depend on the dynamics of conscious experience. These predictions are not considered in our setup and may serve to test a theory of consciousness without the problems we have explored here.


Erratum to: Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness

Lachlan Kent, Marc Wittmann — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8151511, CC BY 4.0.

The originally published version of this manuscript was incorrectly included in a regular issue of the journal, with the citation Volume 2021, Issue 1. The paper should have been included in a special issue, with the following citation: Volume 2021, Issue 2.

The article title should have read: ‘Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness’, with the special issue information listed above the article title.

These errors have been corrected.


Contributor Information

Lachlan Kent, Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, 35 Poplar Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Orygen, 35 Poplar Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Marc Wittmann, Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology and Mental Health, Wilhelmstraße 3a, Freiburg i.Br. 79098, Germany.


What is visible across the visual field?

Andrew M Haun — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8167368, CC BY 4.0.

It is sometimes claimed that because the resolution and sensitivity of visual perception are better in the fovea than in the periphery, peripheral vision cannot support the same kinds of colour and sharpness percepts as foveal vision. The fact that a scene nevertheless seems colourful and sharp throughout the visual field then poses a puzzle. In this study, I use a detailed model of human spatial vision to estimate the visibility of certain properties of natural scenes, including aspects of colourfulness, sharpness, and blurriness, across the visual field. The model is constructed to reproduce basic aspects of human contrast and colour sensitivity over a range of retinal eccentricities. I apply the model to colourful, complex natural scene images, and estimate the degree to which colour and edge information are present in the model’s representation of the scenes. I find that, aside from the intrinsic drift in the spatial scale of the representation, there are not large qualitative differences between foveal and peripheral representations of ‘colourfulness’ and ‘sharpness’.


Introduction

When looking at a scene one may get the feeling that a visual experience is colourful and sharp across the full extent of one’s visual field. Even a savvy observer who knows about the higher objective resolution of foveal vision, or about the regular, rapid, and involuntary movement of the foveae from one part of the scene to another, is likely to get this feeling. However, it is frequently argued that this feeling is illusory. Such arguments—which tend to be part of larger philosophical or theoretical accounts of vision (Dennett 2005; Schwitzgebel 2008; Cohen et al. 2016; Lau and Brown 2019)—are always claimed to be based on physiological or psychophysical facts about visual perception: cone density declines with retinal eccentricity (Curcio et al. 1990), acuity declines even more rapidly and more severely for colour than for achromatic targets (Anderson et al. 1991), contrast sensitivity is poorer peripherally than foveally for most spatial targets (Robson and Graham 1981; Pointer and Hess 1989), and declines more severely for colour targets (Anderson et al. 1991). Therefore, it is argued, however, it seems (or seems to seem) to us, peripheral vision just cannot support the kinds of colour or sharpness percepts supported by foveal vision, and the only explanation for our subjective feelings is that they are illusory.

In contradiction of this argument, the present study shows that human spatial vision permits nearly invariant representation of colour and sharpness across the visual field. To demonstrate this invariance, I use a detailed model of human spatial vision. The model is constructed to reproduce known psychophysical patterns of human contrast perception. Importantly, the main feature of the model that allows it to reproduce these patterns is that its local scale of encoding varies across the extent of its visual field; apart from this variation in local scale, the structure of the model is independent of visual field position. The model is able to closely simulate the same facts that have sometimes been deployed to make claims about degraded peripheral visual experience: its contrast sensitivity and acuity decline with eccentricity, and much more severely for colour stimuli. The analyses that I carry out on the outputs of this model are therefore based directly in the empirical observations that have driven some of the misconceptions at issue.

When discussing properties like colourfulness and sharpness, I take these to be properties intrinsic to an observer’s visual experience. Of course, physical stimuli—which are different kinds of things than perceptual representations—can evoke visual representations like colour or sharpness via sensitive mechanisms of perception. It should be clear that, if colour and sharpness are representations intrinsic to an observer, they do not need to depend on exactly what stimulus evoked them; sensitivity may vary from mechanism to mechanism, but still the same perceptual representation can be evoked by different stimuli. Evidence for the intrinsic nature of colour includes the dissociation of stimulus properties from perceptual colour experiences as in colour constancy (Gegenfurtner et al. 2015), lightness and brightness illusions (Adelson 2000), colour afterimages and hallucinations (McCollough 1965), colour phosphenes (Dobelle and Mladejovsky 1974; Grusser 1995), and colour in dreams (Kahn et al. 1962). Evidence for a corresponding view of sharpness includes similar dissociations, such as in blur adaptation aftereffects (Webster et al. 2002), hallucinatory percepts with clear detail (Richards 1971), sharp-textured phosphenes (Nebel 1957; Tyler 1978), and experience of clear percepts in dreams (Rechtschaffen and Buchignani 1992).

Although the data on which the model is based are not from what we would typically consider studies of consciousness, readers should consider the following in interpreting the results. When a subject in a routine psychophysics task, such as a contrast-detection task, reports seeing a (retrospectively) suprathreshold target by selecting the correct response alternative, we reasonably assume that the subject was conscious of that target (violations of this assumption, known as blindsight, are difficult to obtain in normal vision). In consciousness studies, this assumption is usually confirmed by collecting more detailed responses, for example having subjects also indicate their confidence in having just consciously experienced a target. It is well-known that confidence is strongly correlated with sensitivity (Fleming and Lau 2014), so it would seem natural to conceptually link model sensitivity to conscious visibility, and the results of the present study may be interpreted in light of this link. However, visual experience involves more than just spatial qualities: we also experience the perceptual organization of these qualities (Peterson and Kimchi 2013), and we may recognize them as grounding or constituting objects. Whether or not we experience spatial qualities in the absence of perceptual organization or recognition is a matter of debate (Block 2007; Schwitzgebel 2007; Simons 2007; Lau and Brown 2019), and cannot be addressed by the current study; in either case, the results of the present study are relevant to the visibility, if not the conscious experience, of spatial qualities.


Methods

The spatial vision model was implemented in MATLAB (code available at https://osf.io/8xf9w/). Empirical data used to set model parameters, or for other purposes (e.g. the perceived blur analysis in Section Attention), was extracted from the original study papers using the online WebPlotDigitizer tool (Rohatgi 2017).


Properties of spatial vision

Listed below are psychophysical properties directly relevant to the question of colour/sharpness perception across the visual field (some ‘exemplar’ references are provided for each, but all of these properties have been observed in numerous studies).

Contrast sensitivity is relatively independent between the three opponent chromatic axes (the three ‘colour channels’: luminance-contrast, blue-yellow contrast, and red-green contrast). Put another way, interactions between same-channel patterns are much stronger than interactions between different-channel patterns (Krauskopf et al. 1982; Buchsbaum and Gottschalk 1983; Mullen and Sankeralli 1999).

Spatial frequency acuity (the spatial frequency fa at which contrast sensitivity is = 1, i.e. minimal) is inversely proportional to eccentricity plus a constant (E2):fa = f * E2/(E + E2) (Strasburger et al. 2011).

Foveal acuity is better for achromatic targets than for chromatic targets, and the proportionality constant E2 is higher (acuity declines less with eccentricity for achromatic than for chromatic targets) (Noorlander et al. 1983; Anderson et al. 1991).

The high-spatial frequency decline in contrast sensitivity at any eccentricity is exponential (Yang et al. 1995): S(f) ∼ n−f. This holds over all colour channels.

Contrast sensitivity for a target of any spatial frequency declines exponentially with eccentricity, with a steeper exponent for higher spatial frequencies (Pointer and Hess 1989; Anderson et al. 1991): S(E) ∼ n−E. This also holds over all colour channels.

The visual system is low-pass and sensitivity across the visual field converges for very low spatial frequencies (Pointer and Hess 1989).

Contrast sensitivity (as d’) for targets of increasing contrast follows an expansive/compressive power function (threshold-vs-contrast functions are dipper-shaped) (Nachmias and Sansbury 1974; Legge and Foley 1980).

‘Contrast constancy’: In the absence of other interactions, contrast responses converge at high contrasts, for mechanisms tuned to different spatial frequency, orientation, and/or eccentricity (Georgeson and Sullivan 1975; Cannon 1985; Swanson and Wilson 1985; Chen et al. 2000).

Sensitivity for a low-contrast target of one orientation is strongly impaired by a high-contrast overlaid mask of very different orientation (‘cross-orientation masking’), while a high-contrast target is relatively unaffected by a lower-contrast mask (Foley 1994).

The combined perceptual response to contrast over multiple frequency bands is a high-p-norm (less-than optimal combination: M∼ = 4) (Cannon and Fullenkamp 1991).


Threshold over eccentricity and scale

Properties i-x are interrelated in various ways. Of particular importance, ii., iv. and v. (regarding relation of sensitivity with scale and eccentricity) are distinct aspects of the scale-sensitivity of the visual system, and they are modelled compactly:

This expression is in terms of threshold contrast (t). Here, the exponential term captures the high-frequency limb of the sensitivity function, while L(f, e) captures the low-frequency plateau, which I take to be independent of eccentricity (vi.):

Regarding the high-frequency component of the function, notice how the exponential declines of sensitivity with eccentricity (E) and spatial frequency (f) are intertwined. There are two constants: f0 captures the steepness of the decline in sensitivity with increasing spatial frequency (decreasing scale) and E2 captures the steepness of the decline in sensitivity with increasing eccentricity. In the literature, these two parameters are normally considered separately (see Watson 2018 for a recent synthesis), but it is clear that they modify each other: if f0 is considered as constant, then E2 is effectively reduced as frequency increases: the decline in sensitivity for some target (f) with eccentricity (E) becomes steeper for higher frequencies. Conversely, if E2 is considered as constant, then f0 is effectively reduced as eccentricity (E) increases, meaning that the decline in threshold with frequency gets steeper.

This connection between the contrast sensitivity functions for spatial frequency and eccentricity has an interesting consequence for sensitivity across the visual field: it means that sensitivity to some frequency F1 at some eccentricity E1 is usually equal to sensitivity to a lower frequency F2 at a larger eccentricity E2, and to a higher frequency F0 at some smaller eccentricity E0. The extreme case of this is the acuity frequency: sensitivity to this frequency is defined everywhere across the visual field as a constant value (t = 1). There are, likewise, mechanisms across the visual field with t = ½, t = ¼, and so-on, with the rule breaking down only at some very low (unknown) contrast.


Opponent colour channels

The three colour channels were implemented by transforming RGB input images into the CIElab colour space, composed of a luminance-contrast channel (Achr), a blue-yellow channel (B/Y), and a red-green channel (R/G)—and using these as inputs to the filter layer. The CIElab components are different from the ‘cone contrast’ components typically employed in colour psychophysics, but they are close enough for present purposes (McDermott and Webster 2012). CIElab is also widely available in different code bases and is clearly documented in many sources, making the present results more easily replicable.


Filter structure

The model is framed in a rectangular array of visual field locations, with each location a 2d coordinate in degrees eccentricity from a point of fixation. At each location a complement of filters is assigned: filters tuned to each combination several spatial scales, four orientations, and three colour contrasts. The filters are created on a log-frequency/orientation domain. The frequency profile is a Gaussian, and the orientation profile is a raised cosine:

Frequency bandwidths were fixed at 2σf =1.4 octaves for all filters (Wilson et al. 1983). Orientation bandwidth was fixed at 45 degrees (σθ = ¼π). In the space domain, these are quadrature filters, so they encode both amplitude and phase of content in their pass band. The amplitude of each filter was adjusted so that the linear response (dot-product) of the filter to a full-contrast sinewave grating pattern at its preferred orientation and frequency would be unity (1.0), that is the linear response of each filter was explicitly equated with the ‘contrast energy’ (the phase-invariant Michelson contrast magnitude) of a typical contrast sensitivity test stimulus.

The peak orientations of the filters, at every visual field location and for each colour channel, were [0, 45, 90, 135] from vertical. The peak frequencies depended on eccentricity and colour channel. First, the contrast sensitivity function of was fit to data sets for human sensitivity to achromatic (Pointer and Hess 1989), red-green (Anderson et al. 1991), and blue-yellow (Mullen and Kingdom 2002) contrast stimuli of variable spatial frequency and eccentricity. Next, the ‘local scale’ of the filters (Watson 1987) was set according to the objective acuity at that eccentricity. The acuity frequency for each colour channel as a function of eccentricity was derived by setting threshold t(f, E) = 1 and solving for spatial frequency f. The peak frequencies (fpeak) of the filters for each channel at each eccentricity were set to:

That is, the peak frequency of the finest filter at each location was 1/3 of the acuity limit expected by the pattern of contrast sensitivity, and the coarser filters were spaced 1, 2, and 3 octaves below the finest filter. The low-pass residual from these filters was then inserted to capture the low-frequency plateau of the sensitivity function. This close packing of the frequency bands allowed the filter complement to scale flexibly with eccentricity, avoiding most cases where the coarsest filters might be too large for the test image. For the chromatic filters, three rather than four bandpass filters scales were used along with the low-pass residual.


Suprathreshold sensitivity

The aspects of contrast sensitivity relating to suprathreshold contrasts (vii, viii and x), and the capacity of the model to fit arbitrary threshold levels (i.e. the shape of the psychometric function for contrast detection or discrimination) are all captured with the Foley transducer (Stromeyer and Klein 1974; Legge and Foley 1980; Foley 1994). This transducer defines the signal-noise ratio (d’) as a nonlinear function of contrast, with parameters that depend on the linear filter characteristics:

The variable c is the linear response of a spatial filter to the stimulus. In the current study, p, q, and Rmax are fixed. The threshold parameter z varies with eccentricity, frequency and colour. The linear gain g of each filter is a partial parameter that ordinarily would be at unity and distributed between Rmax and z (Haun 2009); it was considered separately here as it can account in a computationally convenient way for significant differences in sensitivity between colour channels, allowing other parameters to be fixed. The summation in the denominator is over other orientations of same-location, same-frequency, same-colour filters, thus capturing cross-orientation masking (ix). The threshold for each filter is set by transforming the detection threshold functions defined in and, assuming a fixed experimental d’ value (d’=2 was used in all simulations in this study):

is just a rearrangement of, ignoring the cross-orientation terms (basic contrast sensitivity functions are established without masks) and setting contrast equal to an empirical threshold value.


Fitting model to data

First, data were subjected to a curve-fitting procedure to set the free parameters of the CSF model, with starting parameters suggested by the papers where the model components were introduced (Yang et al. 1995; Geisler and Perry 1998; Watson and Ahumada 2005). The nonlinear contrast response parameters (Rmax, p, q) were fixed at the outset to standard values (Legge and Foley 1980; Haun and Peli 2013b). The target data were drawn from the studies listed in. I did not fit B/Y contrast sensitivity data for the final model, and instead scaled the high-s.f. decline constant (f0) of the achromatic sensitivity function, and decreased the linear gain, to obtain a good fit to the B/Y acuity data.

The model was tested by exposing it to actual stimulus images. Each individual filter was convolved with a stimulus, yielding a set of linear measures of contrast at each image location. These linear measures were fed into the response nonlinearity. Responses across scale were combined with a high p-norm, with M = 4; (Cannon and Fullenkamp 1991; Haun and Peli 2013b). The maximum response across the remaining filter dimensions (orientation and colour) is the ‘cross-frequency response’ at each location, and it represents the signal-noise ratio the observer has for making decisions in a SDT task. I constructed achromatic and colour Gabor patch stimuli of varying spatial frequency and centre eccentricity, to (roughly) match the parameters of the exemplar experiments (of). The contrast of each stimulus was adjusted iteratively (Newton’s method) to produce a peak cross-frequency response equal to the ‘experimental’ d’=2 (an unbiased yes/no hit-rate of 84%)—this contrast was the model’s detection threshold for the target stimulus.

Model thresholds are plotted in against data from Mullen (1991) and Pointer and Hess (1989). Also shown are acuity estimates—these are obtained by extrapolating the contrast sensitivity curves to the spatial frequency where sensitivity = 1. In addition to these basic limits of contrast detection, the model also captures suprathreshold aspects of contrast sensitivity. Contrast discrimination (threshold-vs-contrast) functions have the familiar ‘dipper’ shape, where increment thresholds for just-detectable pedestals are smaller than the detection threshold itself, while increment thresholds for suprathreshold pedestals follow a compressive power function (Stevens’ law). Cross-oriented masks elevate the dipper functions in the expected way, though they are much more powerful masks than they should be (since the cross-oriented inputs were not realistically weighted).

In summary, the model generally comes very close to human performance. Whatever conclusions one might draw from the empirical data should transfer well to the simulated data. That is, if one believes (for example) that human colour or sharpness representations must decline in quality due to the observed pattern of contrast sensitivity, then the same belief should apply to the representations of this model. Put another way, the facts pertinent to claims about what a human observer can and cannot experience at the level of contrast perception are all effectively embodied by this model.


Application of the model to natural scenes

The central question in this study can be put this way: given what we know about human contrast sensitivity, what can a typical human observer see in a colourful natural scene? To answer this question I used 100 colourful natural scene photos as stimuli for the model. The scenes were all pulled from the ‘Panorama’ section of the Wikipedia directory of featured pictures (Various, 2019); these images are very high resolution, minimally compressed, and full-colour, and they are of the kinds of interesting vistas that might elicit naïve claims about the apparent vividness of a visual experience. The main selection criterion was that each image must have height and width equal to or greater than 1536 pixels. Inputs to the model were cropped to 1536 × 1536 pixels; if an image had least dimension greater than 3072 pixels, it was cropped down to the nearest multiple of 1536 and then resized down to 1536 × 1536. Some subjective criteria were applied in selecting the scenes, including that the central region of the scene should contain some more ‘interesting’ content than just ground (or sea) and/or sky; some content should be ‘near’, that is obviously telescopic images were excluded; images should seem colourful (scenes like pictures of the desert or of snowy mountains that seemed effectively monochromatic were generally not included, though some were); and a rough balance was sought between ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’ scenes (i.e. of scenes with and without obvious human influence). The list of source images (URLs and photographer credits) is provided in the Appendix. I did not try to match the ‘true’ visual angle of the scenes to the visual angle of the model’s visual field—the necessarily information to recover the true angle was not generally included with the images.

To ‘view’ the scenes, the model was given a 32° square visual field (which would fit comfortably within the angle of view of photographs not taken with wide-angle or long-focus lenses), extending from 1° left of the fixation point to 31° right; and from 16° below to 16° above. The resolution of the field was 1536 × 1536 pixels. The model’s response (in the form of the maximum cross-frequency response at each field location) to one stimulus image is shown in. Right away we learn something about natural scenes: they are composed of high contrasts, as far as the visual system is concerned. Detection thresholds are routinely exceeded across the model visual field, as shown by the very-high d’ values elicited across the scene. If we were doing signal detection experiments with the image components evoking these responses, an observer would respond perfectly (barring finger errors or attentional lapses) across thousands of trials.


Results

Our original questions concern whether the content of natural scene experiences is rightly characterized as ‘colourful’ and ‘sharp’ across the extent of the visual field. So, how do we evaluate these qualities? Colourfulness is the more straightforward to address, so we start there.


Colourfulness

‘Colourfulness’ is an informal term, but in its informal usage it is intended to imply either variegation (i.e. many distinct hues) or vividness (i.e. the presence of a highly saturated colour) of colours, or especially both. Here, I used the ‘hue-saturation-value’ (HSV) representation of colour content to capture these features (Smith 1978).

The ‘visible image’. HSV is a pixelwise representation of image content, whereas the spatial vision model generates a high-dimensional matrix of signal-noise ratios. However, it is straightforward to translate the model’s response to an image back into the form of a ‘visible image’, where we can make use of HSV. To do this, we transform each filter’s signal-noise ratio (d’) into the range [0,1], using this value to weight the positive cosine phase of the filter, and adding all the weighted filters to an output image. The appropriate transformation of d’ is the ‘accuracy’ or ‘reliability’: the greatest difference between the yes/no hit-rate and false-alarm rate:

Here, Φ is the cumulative normal distribution function, R is the d’ elicited by the stimulus. This procedure maps near-zero d’ to near-zero accuracy, and higher d’ to accuracy approaching one. The visible image is then composed of content only to the degree that it elicits psychophysically accurate responses. That is, if a filter response is highly likely to have been elicited by a stimulus (a hit), and highly unlikely to have been due to intrinsic noise (a false alarm), then its contrast is considered ‘visible’ and composes a part of the output image.

The reconstructed image is in CIElab coordinates, and is transformed to HSV coordinates by chaining the MATLAB lab2rgb and rgb2hsv functions.

Sampling across the visual field. An example of a ‘visible image’ is shown at the bottom of. The image seems similar to the original, except for its reduced peripheral resolution. Its colourfulness does not seem reduced across the model field’s extent, but the eye is the wrong judge here (the ‘double-pass problem’: cf. Peli 1996). This is where we make use of the HSV representation, and sample hue variation and saturation across the field. What is the right way to do this? A human observer making a judgment about some image property across the visual field must be using spatial attention, and it is known that the size of the spatial attention ‘spotlight’ varies with eccentricity, with a radius r following a pattern much like the scaling of acuity (Intriligator and Cavanagh 2001):

Here, I followed Intriligator and Cavanaugh’s results (Intriligator and Cavanagh 2001) and set k0 to 5 minutes of arc, and E2 to 0.34 degrees eccentricity; but since this results in foveal windows just a few pixels across (which would result in severe undersampling at the fovea of local quality values for the measures described below) a constant kc of 1 degree was added at all eccentricities. This eccentricity-scaled sampling rule reflects the attentional constraints on the spatial sampling strategy of a human observer tasked with investigating the local spatial distributions of some visual quality like colour.

One could argue that the scaled sampling rule is biased with respect to the central research question, so the scaled rule was compared with an unscaled sampling rule, fixing r at 3.75 degrees. This is the median (from 0 to 31 degrees eccentricity) of the scaled sample window, and is about the size of the parafoveal region. (It is also the radius of the round window made by touching the tips of my thumb and forefinger at a viewing distance of about 40 cm).

Colourfulness over eccentricity. With these sampling rules, we assess colourfulness of model-visible images at each position (in 1-degree steps) along the horizontal midline as shown in. Two measures capture colourfulness at any sample position: first, there is the distribution of saturations, with high saturation quantiles reflecting the most colourful parts of the sample; second, there is the hue entropy, which reflects the variegation of a sample (how many different hues are encountered there). Intuitively, the hue entropy should be computed for saturations that produce visible colours—for this demonstration a relatively low bar of 0.2 saturation was set, since a higher bar tended to reduce sample sizes to zero for many scenes, even near the fovea (very saturated colours in natural images are relatively rare; Long et al. 2006). Saturation quantiles are self-explanatory, and hue entropy (H) is defined as:

The distribution p(hue | sat>lim) was defined over 256 HSV hue bins. Maximum entropy—an even distribution of hues across the full range—would be H = 8 bits. Concentration of colour around particular hues appears as lower entropy.

shows the upper quantiles of the saturation distribution as a function of eccentricity for the different sampling rules; shows the hue entropy. For the scaled rule, there is little dependence on eccentricity of the saturation distribution. For the fixed rule, there is a gradual decline with eccentricity in the saturation of the highest quantiles. The relationship between eccentricity and hue entropy is similarly muted: entropy increases slightly with eccentricity for the scaled rule (for the scaled rule the average increase in entropy is about 0.01 bits per degree), and decreases slightly for the fixed rule (on average losing about 0.04 bits per degree). Entropy is generally around 4 bits in the investigated range.

Considering that the fixed-size sampling rule is unrealistic and probably perceptually impossible, the slight declines in colourfulness for that rule are not what we should expect a human observer to report. At the same time, despite its relative ‘flattening’ by adding 1 degree of radius at each eccentricity, the attention-scaled rule might impose too-rigid a frame to visual field sampling: perhaps observers (especially expert observers) are, with some effort, able to attend much smaller zones in the periphery and much larger zones nearer the fovea, when they are trying to ‘sample fairly’ across the visual field. So the scaled rule might likewise overestimate the relationship in the opposite direction. Left with a relationship somewhere in between a slight increase and a slight decrease, it seems reasonable to describe the relationship between visible colourfulness and retinal eccentricity as negligible.


Sharpness

There is no standard pixelwise measure of ‘sharpness’ analogous to hue and saturation. What could be the response image correlate of apparent sharpness? It is useful to define sharpness negatively, as the absence of apparent blur: if a feature is seen but does not appear blurry, then it appears sharp. The spatial spread of ‘just detectable blur’ increases in proportion to eccentricity in a similar way as acuity (Hess et al. 1989; Levi and Klein 1990; Wang and Ciuffreda 2005; Maiello et al. 2017). That is, across the visual field, if the spatial spread of blur is less than the acuity limit, a ‘blur percept’ will not be evoked; but if the spread is larger, it will be. So, a simple model of sharpness should capture whether or not content at some position in the visual field (especially ‘feature’ content) extends all the way to the acuity limit.

A measure applicable to the multiscale channel contrast responses of our model can be derived from the ‘scale space’ notion of feature representation (Koenderink 1984; Witkin 1987; Perona and Malik 1990; Georgeson et al. 2007). uses this concept to illustrate the distinction between physical sharpness (e.g. ‘high resolution’) and perceived sharpness (‘perceptual clarity’), and to explain how we can find a correlate of apparent sharpness in the spatial vision model. These properties (physical and perceived sharpness) may often be conflated, but they are just as distinct as, for example, reflectance spectrum and perceived colour. The left two panels (A, C) show the scale-space representation of a high-resolution edge: such an edge exists, in physical terms, as a feature at a particular spatial region (on the x-axis) extending from coarse scales up to fine scales. The right panels (B, D) show a low-resolution edge: this edge exists as a feature that extends from coarse scales up to only moderately fine scales. These are two physically different features, but they do not determine perceptual qualities: perceptual mechanisms also have to be taken into account. The upper and lower panels contrast two different filter scales—a fine-scale ‘foveal’ filter set, and a coarse-scale ‘peripheral’ set. The foveal filters distinguish between the two features in that the lower-resolution edge does not elicit any response from the smallest filters. So, the high-resolution edge elicits a ‘complete’ filter response, and the low-resolution edge elicits an ‘incomplete’ response. The peripheral filters do not distinguish the two features: for this filter set, both edges elicit ‘complete’ responses.

The implication of the scale-space demonstration is that ‘apparent sharpness’ is closely related to a complete filter response, and is therefore distinct from the physical resolution of a stimulus. This link between apparent sharpness (and blur) and a cross-scale response has been proposed many times, though always in different forms (e.g. Elder and Zucker 1996; Wang and Simoncelli 2003; Georgeson et al. 2007), and usually in reference to foveal perception (one exception is Anstis 1998). Going by this way of thinking about apparent sharpness, we can recruit the ‘response accuracy’ statistic of and define apparent sharpness as the cross-scale product of accuracies at a given location:

This ‘filter completeness’ measure (FC), approaches a value of 1 when all similarly oriented filters at some spatial position are responding strongly, as would happen in the presence of an oriented feature that is at least as finely resolved as the smallest filter.

illustrates the application of this idea to the model responses to natural cenes, taking filter completeness to be FCθ values greater than 0.96 (allowing that each of four filter responses has accuracy ∼0.99). Here, I evaluate filter completeness only for the luminance channel, since its smaller filter size means that it must in any case be the driver of sharpness judgments. The first panel (A) shows the visible luminance-contrast image for a particular scene; the next panel (B) highlights the regions of the image where the model response was ‘filter complete’. Using the same two sampling rules as in the colourfulness analysis, the last panel (C) shows the average filter completeness—the mean of FCθ >0.96 within the sample region—as a function of (horizontal) eccentricity. This analysis is insensitive to sampling rule, but there is a clear positive trend with eccentricity of increasing filter completeness. Under the hypothesis that filter completeness underlies apparent sharpness, the spatial vision model does not support the notion that apparent sharpness should decline with eccentricity.

Apparent blur of visible content. Apparent sharpness does not capture the whole story: if a feature does not appear sharp, then it must appear blurry, and there is plenty of room for features to appear more or less blurry depending on various circumstances. Apparent blur, that is how blurry something appears to be (with ‘sharpness’ being the minimum of apparent blur), is usually measured by perceptually matching the blur of one percept to the blur of another. In a pair of studies especially relevant to the central question of this study, Galvin et al. (1997) measured apparent blur matches between foveal and peripheral stimulus positions. They found that a blurred edge viewed peripherally was subjectively matched to a less-blurred edge viewed foveally (scattered symbols in). They called this effect ‘sharpness over-constancy’. They proposed that some mechanism corrects for the lower resolution of peripheral vision. In their view, peripheral stimuli appear sharper than they should: implicitly they were taking ‘foveal appearance’ as the standard for how things ought-to-look. The spatial vision model suggests a different interpretation of their results. replots data from Galvin et al’s Experiment 1, along with perceived-blur matching functions from the spatial vision model. ‘Apparent blur’ does not have an easy implementation in the scale space model, so I adapted the simple ‘response slope’ model of Elliott et al. (2011) and Haun and Peli (2013a). In their model, apparent blur is equated to the rate of decrease (m) of the perceptual response (here R) as the log filter scale decreases (as log center frequency f increases):

This model was originally designed to explain perceived blur of a special class of stimuli (blurred by steepening the amplitude spectrum slope; Elliott et al. 2011; Haun and Peli 2013a), and it performs very badly (i.e. non-monotonically for increasing blur levels) for gaussian-blurred stimuli. However, I found that adjusting the slope term by the local response (the M = 4 norm) yields blur estimates that monotonically increase with stimulus blur, so the ‘apparent blur’ term β is:

When there is similar response across filter scale (as would be ideally evoked by the large edge stimuli of the Galvin et al. study), will be near zero—when response declines with increasing filter scale, will be negative. can also run to positive values (‘oversharpness’) when there is relatively more fine-scale than coarse-scale content, as with a fine-grained texture.

This perceived-blur model (as with most or all others proposed) has been tested only with foveal psychophysics data, and it fits the matching Galvin data only roughly. However, notice how it fails: held to a foveal standard, the spatial vision model behaves as though peripheral content, especially at larger eccentricities, is perceived as even less blurry than Galvin et al. found it to be. That is, rather than sharpness over-constancy, there may be an under-constancy at work in human peripheral vision. One possible culprit here is crowding (Rosenholtz 2016): a subject’s relative inability to judge the qualities of content in peripheral vision, despite the psychophysical availability of the necessary information, might contribute to judgments of apparent blur (does a crowded display feel more blurry?). Or, it could be that observers have some natural knowledge that the objective resolution of peripheral vision is less than that of foveal vision, and they are injecting that knowledge into their decisions about apparent peripheral blur. Finally, the model of and might simply be inadequate. At any rate, the spatial vision model does not predict that peripheral stimuli should be judged as blurrier than foveal stimuli, or indeed as blurrier than human observers themselves tend to judge them.

Apparent blur and sharpness of natural scenes. The apparent blur model of the previous section is straightforward to apply to the natural scene contrast responses underlying the analyses in previous sections. This analysis requires the obvious caveat that, as shown in, the apparent blur model is a rough fit to the one available data set (Galvin et al. 1997). Also, except for the example of, the model has never been validated on local image patches, only on ‘whole image’ statistics (Elliott et al. 2011; Haun and Peli 2013a). However, the model is not that far off the Galvin et al. results—it closely matches data at smaller eccentricities, and is at least monotonic with the psychophysical patterns.

shows how the apparent blur parameter, as evoked by the scene images, varies with eccentricity: it does not vary much at all, averaging a positive value at every eccentricity. If, in viewing a panorama, normal human observers are comparing some statistic like across their visual fields, they should find that the distribution of apparent blurs is not obviously dependent on retinal position. In fact, if the intrinsic blur statistic is anything like, they should find that a typical scene (that is, one viewed at optical infinity, as with most of our sample scenes) does not contain much blur at all.


Attention

The target data on which the model is constructed and tested were all collected under conditions where the stimulus was the sole focus of the observer’s spatial attention. So, the findings would seem to hold for, at a minimum, judgments about attended colour and sharpness qualities. What happens to colourfulness and sharpness when spatial attention is withdrawn from a region of the visual field?

The effects of spatial attention are complex (involving shifting tuning for individual neurons, changes to perceptual organization and recognition, and surprising phenomena like inattentional blindness) and, in general, its mechanisms are poorly understood. However, at the level of early spatial vision, we have some idea of what is happening. Neural and psychophysical measures seem to agree that spatial attention corresponds to enhancement of contrast response (Buracas and Boynton 2007; Herrmann et al. 2009; Reynolds and Heeger 2009; Bressler et al. 2013; Guo et al. 2020); so, withdrawal of spatial attention means reduced contrast sensitivity, reduced perceived contrast (but see Schneider and Komlos 2008), and attenuated neural response. A crude implementation of this enhancement (or of its withdrawal) in the model would be to vary the amplitude (Rmax in) of the contrast response function. If the main model reflects the enhanced response state of an attended region, we can implement the withdrawal of attention by reducing Rmax. Reducing this parameter would mirror the kinds of reductions seen in neural contrast response functions (Luck et al. 1997; Gandhi et al. 1999; Buracas and Boynton 2007), and would also reduce contrast sensitivity and perceived contrast judgments (assuming that perceived contrast is strongly linked to contrast response magnitude) in similar ways to what is observed psychophysically (Foley and Schwarz 1998; Carrasco et al. 2000, Huang and Dobkins 2005; Carrasco and Barbot 2019).

I repeated the colourfulness and sharpness analyses using a version of the model with Rmax reduced by 25% (Rmax = 22.5; this reduction is consistent with the magnitude of attentional effect on fMRI BOLD response). This is a significant reduction that produces psychophysical effects in a similar range to what has been observed in numerous studies, reducing sensitivity by around 20%, depending on the default sensitivity of each mechanism, but I did not try to fit the reduction to any particular data set (see Lee et al. 1997 and Carrasco et al. 2000 for similar effects; many other effects of similar magnitude are reviewed in Carrasco (2011).

also compares the original perceptual quality measures of the ‘attended’ scenes with measures of the ‘unattended’ scenes. The changes to colourfulness are modest: unattended regions have reduced saturation (99th percentile saturations, on average, drop from 0.54 to 0.51) and slightly reduced hue entropy (from 4.31 to 4.25 bits). The changes to sharpness are larger: edge density (averaged over eccentricity) drops from around 0.27 to around 0.21, roughly proportional to the change in response amplitude. Interestingly, the apparent blur metric increases slightly with inattention—while decreasing Rmax would reduce the slope estimates underlying the blur metric, the normalizing factor, being decreased by the same factor, over-compensates for the reduction. If we think that apparent blur should change similarly to edge density, we can suppose that the visual system ‘knows’ about the inattentional reduction of Rmax, and takes this reduction into account by reducing R-based statistics by the same proportion: basically, we multiply the original by the reduction factor. The dotted line in shows this adjusted is similarly reduced to the reduction in edge density.

These attentional effects on visible qualities are not very dramatic, but they are real. If the actual effects of withdrawing attention on contrast sensitivity are larger than what is modelled here, then the effects on perceptual qualities would be correspondingly larger. Overall, this may support a weak version of the so-called ‘refrigerator light illusion’ (Block 2001), which is the notion that unattended properties of visual experience may be somewhat different from attended properties—but that we would not notice the difference, since whenever we check we find the attended versions of those properties.

Why, if the contrast response (and sensitivity) is changed so significantly, are visible qualities not more dramatically affected? The answer is that saturated colours or sharp details are evoked by high physical contrasts that yield (in the attended case) very high signal-noise ratios; halving these ratios will generally still result in a suprathreshold response (e.g. going from d’=8 to 4). If halving the contrast response results in a large decline in the accuracy of a feature, then the attended response must already have been rather weak (e.g. from d’=2 to 1). In terms of accuracy, the reduction of contrast response magnitude only has meaningful consequences for features whose attended response was in the range [0,∼4]. Responses in this range already contribute only marginally to colourfulness and sharpness (this is almost by-definition: of course low contrasts do not contribute much to judgments of sharp edges or vivid colour). The effects of attentional enhancement of contrast response are on the faint and hard-to-see, rather than on the vivid and easy-to-see.


Discussion

According to standard techniques for measuring human vision, basic capacities of visual perception (sensitivity and resolution) decline significantly with increasing retinal eccentricity. These facts have led some to conclude that perceptual qualities must therefore degrade with eccentricity. To the contrary, however, the present study shows that, given the sensitivity and resolution of the normal human observer, one would expect perceptual qualities to be rather stable across the visual field. This demonstration requires only that we take an intrinsic perspective on spatial vision: that the visual system can only know about what it can represent; it cannot know about what it cannot represent. This idea was expressed particularly well by Anstis in his 1998 paper on understanding peripheral acuity: “Why does the whole visual field normally look equally sharp all over, when there is clearly an enormous degradation of the visible detail in peripheral vision? This is an ill-posed question. After all, if our acuity were 1000 times better than it is, we could throw away our microscopes, yet our 'limited’ foveal acuity which prevents us from seeing bacteria with the naked eye never looks like any kind of subjective blur! The same applies to our limited peripheral acuity. A channel cannot signal anything about stimuli to which it is not tuned, so peripheral retinal channels must remain silent in the presence—or absence—of high spatial frequencies to which they are blind.” (Anstis 1998)

This way of understanding visual perception might seem straightforward, but an ‘extrinsic’ perspective on vision may be closer to the mainstream of cognitive science, since it fits well with overarching theories of computation and information-processing, and notions of veridicality and intentionality (some distinct recent critiques of the extrinsic perspective include, Lehky et al. 2013; Hoffman and Prakash 2014; Brette 2019). That is, we tend to see perception—and perceptual experience, specifically—as a process involving an external signal, an internal response or representation, and mechanisms linking the two. Under this perspective, it may seem intuitive that, because there are small image features that can be seen foveally but not peripherally, peripheral vision is actually blurry in comparison to foveal vision. The fact that it does not seem this way then produces an excitingly counterintuitive thesis: that the visual field does not really feel the way it seems to feel, and introspective judgments about visual qualities are not to be trusted. However, perceptual experience is, by most accounts, intrinsic to the observer, and cannot involve the stimuli per se: if there are stimulus properties that are not represented in experience, their absence does not figure in the experience. Rather, the experience is entirely a matter of the structure of the representation. Because the structure of edge representation in the periphery and the fovea is similar, they may well be experienced in very similar ways, despite the fact that they can be evoked by different stimuli.

It has also been pointed out before that colour perception is largely independent of retinal position, when targets are scaled to match the local scale of the visual field (Noorlander et al. 1983; Block 2007; Tyler 2015; Haun et al. 2017). One counterargument to this is that objects in natural scenes, as opposed to eccentricity-scaled experiment stimuli, do not change size when they fall at different retinal eccentricities, and so the size dependence of colour perception across the retina is not relevant to natural vision (Van Gulick 2007; Burnston 2018). However, natural scenes are scale invariant (Burton and Moorhead 1987; Ruderman and Bialek 1994), meaning that, on average, any location within a scene may contain spatial content at all scales. So, a neuron with a large colour-opponent receptive field in the periphery is as likely as one with a small foveal receptive field to find a stimulus that excites it.


Caveats and conclusion

The spatial vision model I have used in this study is not unique. There are many alternate formalisms for sensitivity across the visual field (e.g. Watson and Ahumada 2016; Schütt and Wichmann 2017; Watson 2018), sensitivity to different levels of contrast (e.g. Lu and Dosher 1999), and colour vision. There are also many alternate models of blur perception, only some of which would be compatible with the contrast response model I have presented (e.g. Field and Brady 1997). I selected the components of this model for their simplicity and compatibility. The important thing for my purposes is that these different models are generally psychophysically equivalent. That is, I expect that an alternate spatial vision model could be constructed, but as long as it fits the psychophysical properties listed in points i-x (Section Methods), the ensuing statistical analyses will be the same. So, I do not believe that the results of this study are the consequence of some peculiar modelling choices.

I hope the scope of these findings is clear. The familiar psychophysical patterns of exponential decline in sensitivity with eccentricity and spatial frequency, and the steeper decline for chromatic channels, do not mean that peripheral vision is incapable of representing colour or sharpness in the same way as foveal vision. This is not to say that capacity for visual qualities must be represented in the same way across the visual field. The main analyses of colourfulness and sharpness are merely describing the informational relationship between the visual system and complex scene stimuli. How the visual system uses this information to form higher-level representations is a question that could be addressed with the suprathreshold regime of a model like what I have presented, but except for the perceived blur model, I have not tried to do it in this study (for reasons detailed in the Appendix, I expect the model would need more work).

Even given that the visual system has the necessary information for representing colourfulness and sharpness across the visual field, there are other processes that may interfere. Crowding is an obvious difference between foveal and peripheral vision, but it is unknown how crowding interacts with apparent colourfulness or sharpness. Attention is another obvious difference between the foveal and peripheral fields, since it naturally resides at the foveal field, but this has already been addressed to some extent (Section Sharpness): withdrawing attention from a region of the visual field does not result in a collapse of our capacity to represent colour and contrast. Rather, withdrawing attention results in a modest decrement in that capacity. The phenomenon of inattentional blindness, where unattended objects or features (or their absence) go completely unnoticed, might have little to do with the effects of attention on low-level visual perception. Instead, the phenomenon might be more similar to inattentional agnosia than blindness (Simons 2000; Koivisto and Revonsuo 2008): just as an individual with object agnosia experiences colours and textures without experiencing the object those qualities compose (Farah 2004), we might routinely experience the spatial qualities of an unattended peripherally viewed scene, without recognizing what they compose. Given that the known effects of attention on contrast perception are rather moderate, I take this to be a simpler alternative than supposing that attention might be necessary, through the action of some as-yet unknown mechanism, for the experience of colour (as considered in e.g. Cohen et al. 2020). However, the present results are not evidence against such a mechanism, and such a powerful ‘refrigerator light phenomenon’ would be, by definition, very difficult to test experimentally.

A goal of this study was to dispel the notion that peripheral experience of colour and sharpness must be illusory because the periphery is unable to support such percepts. Given the results of the current study, is there still any sense in which the qualities of peripheral vision might be thought of as illusory? I think there certainly is. In one study (Balas and Sinha 2007), it was found that observers judge rapidly presented scenes to be in full-colour even when a significant portion of the scene area is fully desaturated. If we take this result at face value, supposing that the local spatial structure of the scene actually became colourful as a result of, for example, some top-down influence, it is a proper visual illusion: the scene appears one way, even though the stimulus would have been expected to elicit a different appearance. The ‘uniformity illusion’ (Otten et al. 2017) is similar, except with textures rather than colours: parts of the display appear one way, though the stimulus is a very different way. These are illusions in that the percept is at odds with the stimulus (or with our expectations of how it should appear). That the appearances are real, that they feel the way they seem to, is well-within the capacities of the visual system. If ‘illusion’ is taken to mean that one believes one experiences something that one cannot experience, then there is nothing obviously illusory about the apparent colourfulness and clarity of a natural scene that fills the visual field.


Apophatic science: how computational modeling can explain consciousness

Will Bridewell, Alistair M C Isaac — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8206510, CC BY 4.0.

This study introduces a novel methodology for consciousness science. Consciousness as we understand it pretheoretically is inherently subjective, yet the data available to science are irreducibly intersubjective. This poses a unique challenge for attempts to investigate consciousness empirically. We meet this challenge by combining two insights. First, we emphasize the role that computational models play in integrating results relevant to consciousness from across the cognitive sciences. This move echoes Alan Newell’s call that the language and concepts of computer science serve as a lingua franca for integrative cognitive science. Second, our central contribution is a new method for validating computational models that treats them as providing negative data on consciousness: data about what consciousness is not. This method is designed to support a quantitative science of consciousness while avoiding metaphysical commitments. We discuss how this methodology applies to current and future research and address questions that others have raised.

Keywords: computationalism, consciousness, evidence, functionalism, methodology, modeling


Introduction

“Consciousness science” is an oxymoron. On the one hand, a defining feature of consciousness is its subjective character, which we each access directly through personal experience; on the other hand, the empirical sciences demand that data be intersubjectively accessible and reproducible, effectively factoring out the personal and subjective. Paradoxically, then, the feature that distinguishes consciousness as a natural phenomenon must be absent from the data of consciousness science (Nagel 1986; Chalmers 2010; Overgaard 2015). Despite the recent explosion of empirical and theoretical work on consciousness, this paradox has yet to be adequately resolved. This paper proposes a new method for validating models in consciousness science that solves this problem. After motivating the method and its key commitments, we re-evaluate existing research in terms of our methodology and respond to a number of objections.


Apophatic science in brief

The key insight we aim to defend is that models need not investigate an explanatory target “from within,” by exemplifying or instantiating that target. They may also circumscribe a target of explanation “from without,” by ruling out putative explanations of the target. By generating increasingly sophisticated models of cognitive agents that lack consciousness, we learn more about what consciousness is not, and consequently, more about consciousness itself. While this claim may appear counterintuitive, we argue that the structure of this research program is directly analogous to that found in paradigmatic quantitative sciences, such as fundamental physics. The true test of an explanatory and scientific research program is that it leads to increasingly precise models and passes increasingly rigorous evidential tests. The method we suggest conforms to this pattern and thus may ground a rigorous and quantitative science of consciousness.

Cheekily, we have christened this method apophatic, in reference to apophatic or negative theology (Putnam 1997). Faced with the task of understanding a divine entity, in principle inaccessible to human comprehension, apophatic theology proceeds by elucidating those features which God is not, thereby carving out a negative characterization. Likewise, consciousness exhibits essential features that are intersubjectively inaccessible, and apophatic science proceeds by systematically exploring models that fail to capture these features, thereby refuting through successful simulation insufficient accounts of consciousness. The analogy breaks down in several ways, however. Whereas God may be entirely inaccessible, consciousness is partially accessible through a wide variety of experimental paradigms. Whereas apophatic theology is used to produce subjective mystical states, apophatic science aims to produce intersubjectively verifiable empirical knowledge. Crucially, we demand that a negative characterization of consciousness be evaluable by quantitative measures such as its fit to empirical data.


Modeling front and center

Apophatic consciousness science gives models pride of place. Inquiry is structured as follows: (i) procedures such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), and the recording of verbal report and behavioral response are used to collect data on phenomena related to consciousness; (ii) these data are summarized in mechanistic descriptions, theories, or models validated through ordinary techniques; and then (iii) these piecemeal models are integrated within a computational simulation or robotic embodiment that instantiates the relevant mechanisms and reproduces target behaviors. On our view, only step (iii) addresses consciousness tout court, and the new method for model validation applies only here, not elsewhere in the cognitive sciences. The challenge for consciousness science is to find a model genuinely targeted on subjective experience that can nevertheless be improved in response to intersubjective data. Apophatic model validation is a new way to assess a model’s relevance to consciousness and to iteratively improve the model through comparisons with data.


Methodology not metaphysics

We stress that this project concerns the methodology of consciousness science: what are the right methods for studying consciousness empirically, and how may these methods be justified? Although our discussion will necessarily intersect with issues in the philosophy of consciousness, this is not a project in epistemology or metaphysics. For instance, we are not advocating mysterianism, the view that the relationship between consciousness and matter is somehow forever inaccessible to human understanding (McGinn 1989). That claim concerns understanding in principle and across all modes of inquiry. In contrast, we are concerned with the technical roles of intersubjective data and computational models in studying subjective phenomena. Likewise, we take no stance on whether conscious experience reduces to functional or physical properties of its neural substrate.

Although we remain agnostic on these questions, we must engage them in a limited way, as the metaphysical commitments of consciousness scientists have influenced their methodology. For instance, endorsing eliminativism or reductionism (often and implicitly) permits one to deny the subjective character of experience and to assert that models of “access consciousness” make direct progress on consciousness proper (Block 1995). Conversely, metaphysical and epistemological arguments by philosophers have been used to cast doubt on the explanatory relevance of consciousness science to phenomenal consciousness, identifying a uniquely “hard” why-question about consciousness intractable to empirical methods (Chalmers 1996). Our goal is a method that can make genuine progress on the scientific understanding of consciousness without taking a side in this debate.


Computationalism and Explanatory Unity

This methodological project is grounded in two constraints on a satisfactory account of consciousness. First, we prioritize explanatory unity. Consciousness permeates human experience, and accounts that separately explain listening-to-beeps-consciousness, looking-at-squares-consciousness, reading-instructions-consciousness, Stroop-task-consciousness, car-driving-consciousness, and so on are inadequate to capture this pervasive nature. Although we may learn from such isolated explanations, the goal should always be an integrated theory that covers all consciousness-relevant phenomena: those behaviors, mechanisms, and scenarios identified as involving consciousness by disciplines across the cognitive sciences. Second, we embrace the methods of computational model building, which we take (without argument) to be uniquely suited to this task. More specifically, our own research aims to develop artificial, intelligent, human-like agents, and we conjecture that at a minimum, agency requires some feature to play the functional role of a conscious and unconscious divide (Bello and Bridewell 2017). These two constraints are drawn from Allen Newell’s original program for computationalism: the simulation of increasingly realistic behavior by empirically informed models (Newell 1973).

Newell initially proposed the methods of computationalism as a framework for integrating diverse types of evidence from across the cognitive sciences into coherent explanations. Consider his (1973) comments on the state of psychology in the paper “You Can’t Play 20 Questions with Nature and Win,” where he laments, “We never seem in the experimental literature to put the results of all the experiments together,” concluding that, when studying the human subject, “the ‘normal’ means of science may not suffice” (298–9). Newell was driven by the apparent heterogeneity and lack of unification across the laundry list of empirical results presented at a prominent symposium on cognition. While he found each result intriguing, he questioned whether the mere amalgamation of “effects” constitutes a genuine increase in knowledge.

Newell’s positive suggestion was that the information processing perspective could serve as the critical “glue” for binding diverse empirical results in cognitive psychology together within a unified framework. Researchers were to build complete, computational models of complex tasks or to develop wholesale “cognitive architectures” that could take instructions as input and execute a task in the same manner as human subjects. Newell does not speak specifically of consciousness, but he is interested in unifying results in cognitive psychology under a single theory that will capture “the essential structure of the mind” (ibid., 306). Accordingly, computer science was to play a critical role in Newell’s vision by providing a lingua franca for stating comprehensive theories of the control structures underlying human behavior. While his call has had limited traction in the cognitive sciences, we think that this methodological computationalism is a promising approach to developing progressively expansive and integrated models that provide a unified account of conscious experience.


The Challenge of Modeling Consciousness

Applied to consciousness, methodological computationalism aims to construct integrated models of consciousness-relevant phenomena and to iteratively improve them in response to empirical data. As in any modeling effort, this project requires a way to validate a model (i.e., to ensure it is targeted at consciousness proper) and a way to guide its systematic improvement. These requirements are connected in that model improvements are often inspired by a failure to satisfactorily account for data. Instances of this standard modeling procedure can be found in discussions of physics (Hesse 1962; Smith 2014), biology and the cognitive sciences (Bechtel 2008; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010), and other fields (Morgan 2012; Currie 2018; Weisberg 2018). The unique empirical challenge of consciousness science is that consciousness is constitutively subjective, yet empirical data must be intersubjectively accessible (Chalmers 2010, Chapter 2; Overgaard 2015). We claim that there is a way to overcome this challenge in order to pursue a research program centered on computational models of consciousness. Before describing our solution, we look at this concern in closer detail.


Confronting the hill of subjectivity

Skeptical arguments on the role of intersubjective data in consciousness science are common, so we only briefly rehearse the main points here. The qualitative discontinuity between subjective phenomenal character and intersubjective data is perhaps most clear in the case of neurological data. We agree that models may be validated against data on the neural correlates of consciousness by checking for functional correspondence between their components and corresponding neural targets. For instance, Anderson (2005) compares a computational model of algebraic problem solving with neuroscientific evidence from subjects engaged in algebraic reasoning. Yet the fit between Anderson’s model and neural data cannot validate the model as conscious. The most that fitting such data can do is validate a model as implementing or predicting correlates of consciousness, and this is precisely because we lack a theory of the causal relationship between neural correlates and consciousness itself (Chalmers 1995).

This argument extends to every method of gathering data about consciousness. Consider results on “reconstructing visual experience” from neural data (Haynes 2009); for instance, Nishimoto et al. (2011) report on the ability to generate images from fMRI data of a person watching a video. Their model is validated by checking the fit between the images it generates and the stimulus image, a procedure that explicitly detours around the subjective character of experience. Recently popular “no-report” paradigms (Tsuchiya et al. 2015) fare no better, testing for patterns of neural activity presumed to be correlated with consciousness, but confirmed only through functional analysis (Phillips 2018). Finally, in the case of verbal reports, we agree that they provide data relevant to consciousness (Dennett 2003), but as Chalmers (2018) emphasizes, they remain at best a superficial expression of the real explanandum, the consciousness-driven disposition to report. That is, people may be disposed to make a large number of verbal reports even though they eventually make only one, which may be specific to a current prompt or goal. As a result, the relationship between the report and the richness of the underlying conscious state is too tenuous for empirical validation.

Our purpose in rehearsing these well-known skeptical challenges for an empirical science of consciousness is not to defend pessimism, but merely to make vivid the obstacle to traditional methods of model validation. If we are dissatisfied with targeting only the correlates of consciousness, what recourse do we then have?


Imagining Sisyphus happy

We see two paths to bridging the gap between models of consciousness and correlational data. On the first path, one facilitates model validation by adopting a strong metaphysical view toward consciousness, but this comes with (we think unacceptable) explanatory costs. On the second, rockier path, one embraces metaphysical agnosticism, but then must grapple with the question of how models may be validated without the possibility of confirmatory data. This move, we claim, is the more promising one although it requires the introduction of a novel methodology.

If a modeler directly identifies consciousness with intersubjectively available phenomena they can validate their model as conscious. However, by stipulating that “consciousness” is intersubjectively accessible after all, they thereby sever any evidential link between empirical data and our pre-theoretical understanding of the explanandum of consciousness science. This is an in-principle point, applying not only to functionalism, historically the preferred account of consciousness for computationalists, but also to biological materialism (Searle 1992) and panpsychism (Nagel 1979; Seager 2019). Validating a model by committing to any of these views renders model evaluation a Pyrrhic gesture, as it blocks the possibility of iterative progress toward an explanation of subjective experience. Instead, progress is made toward explaining whatever stand-in for that experience is stipulated by the theoretical view. The situation is even worse for metaphysical positions that assert that consciousness is irreducibly mysterious (McGinn 1989) or that it inhabits an empirically inaccessible realm, such as the dualism of Descartes, since they relinquish any possibility for model validation.

In contrast, agnosticism toward the metaphysics of consciousness at least avoids immediately rendering validation Pyrrhic or impossible, but a methodology for metaphysical agnosticism is far from obvious. Naïve agnosticism about whether any model itself instantiates consciousness is a nonstarter. Suppose someone builds a robot whose software architecture implements the Global Workspace Theory of consciousness (GWT; Baars 1997). True-believer GWT-functionalists assert that the robot is conscious, biological materialists and dualists assert it is not, and agnostics simply shrug their shoulders and refuse judgment. The naïve agnostic response is worse than unhelpful because it closes off any route for iterative model improvement. If no features of a model are deemed relevant to its status as conscious—as indeed must be the case for the true agnostic—then how can there be a systematic procedure for revising a model in response to evidence? If an agnostic wants to assess one model of consciousness as better than another, then they must be prepared to treat, at least provisionally, some features of models or their behavior as responsive to intersubjectively available empirical data in a consciousness-relevant way. The metaphysical agnostic needs a methodological principle for improving models of conscious agents that turns agnosticism into an evidential tool, permitting a monotonic progression of model improvement.

Consciousness science needs a metaphysically agnostic, but methodologically substantive perspective: an approach that can validate models as targeted at consciousness without relying foundationally on any position in the metaphysical debate about consciousness, thereby serving physicalists, dualists, and panpsychists equally. To be successful, this approach must ensure not only that a model is targeted at consciousness as an explanandum but also that it is susceptible to iterative improvement through comparison with empirical results. Apophatic model validation fulfills both criteria.


The Apophatic Method

Typically, models are expected to produce output that corresponds to data measured in the world. If there is a hidden entity or process, x, driving the production of those data, we refer to them as x-relevant. Crucially, models of x-relevant data need not represent or reproduce x itself. For instance, computational models of the climate do not produce a miniature climate, they produce output that corresponds to climate-relevant data. Likewise, computational models that target consciousness as their explanandum do not need to produce consciousness to generate consciousness-relevant output.

Moving from the observation that successful models need not reproduce consciousness, to the provisional stipulation that they cannot, motivates a new methodology for model validation that supports iterative improvement: apophatic model validation. In this paradigm, models act as negative data: evidence that the theoretical principles encoded in a model of consciousness-relevant phenomena are insufficient for explaining consciousness. A model may nevertheless be assessed as an improvement over its predecessor if it reproduces more consciousness-relevant data. A sequence of “insufficient” models that each improves on their predecessors delimits the boundaries of consciousness from without, systematically probing its power to resist computational simulation.


A science of consciousness for the metaphysically agnostic

The apophatic method combines Newell’s methodological computationalism with apophatic model validation. The core approach is in line with Newell: build a series of models that accounts for an increasing number of consciousness-relevant phenomena with increasing levels of fidelity to the mechanisms suspected of enabling human consciousness. The apophatic twist is that each model is validated according to the methodological assumption that consciousness does not result from information processing. In other words, a model is always inadequate, and the mechanisms that it implements are deemed insufficient for explaining consciousness. Researchers chip away at theoretical claims about consciousness-relevant phenomena through computational implementation, reporting “still not conscious” as their models increase in detail. The result is a research program that continually reports “not this, not that” about the underlying claims, challenging theorists to commit to increasingly specific hypotheses and pushing them away from dogmatic or vague assertions.

We offer apophatic model validation as a methodology that remains agnostic on the metaphysical questions of consciousness. It grants the long-standing philosophical criticisms of functionalism and its physicalist cousins (Descartes 1633; Leibniz 1714; Searle 1980; Chalmers 1996) that functionalism closes the gap between subjective experience and intersubjective data through a stipulation that renders models inadequate for targeting consciousness as we understand it pre-theoretically. Yet we do not accept the defeatist conclusion that computational methods are irrelevant for studying consciousness proper. Nor is the negative evaluation of models as “still not conscious” grounded in an anti-functionalist metaphysics. We do not assume dualism, for instance, or biological materialism, either of which would imply the conclusion that no model is conscious, at the cost of making progress in modeling consciousness impossible.

Rather, the methodological claim that no particular model instantiates consciousness should be understood instrumentally, as a tool for rendering data relevant to models, and thereby introducing the possibility of their progressive improvement. The irony of our ecumenical approach is this: by embracing the criticisms of computationalism leveled by anti-functionalists, we can better ground the methodological computationalism of Newell, paving the way for a consciousness science both metaphysics-neutral and responsive to data.


An integrative science of consciousness

Notably, we do not intend to suggest that neuroscience, psychology, or any other subfield of cognitive science needs to reform either its distinctive methods or its basic strategies for model validation. Specific models in these disciplines may continue to be validated by confirming their predictions against empirical data. These techniques are unquestionably appropriate when the explanatory targets are intersubjectively measurable quantities like patterns of neural firing or behavioral profiles. However, when it comes to consciousness considered as a subjective experience, then the standards of model evaluation change. This is where apophatic models provide value, as a means both for integrating diverse results concerning consciousness-relevant phenomena and of testing claims about the nature of that integration.

By eschewing any substantive position in the metaphysical debate, the apophatic method encourages modesty. We treat the success of any integrative model of consciousness-relevant phenomena skeptically, as a negative datum that the particular pattern of functional relations implemented in the model is insufficient to account for consciousness tout court. This failure then motivates a successor model that subsumes an increasing amount of consciousness-relevant phenomena. Methodologically, this process proceeds by testing conjectures about what constitutes consciousness via implementation, knowing that success in modeling, which is by no means guaranteed, implies a failure to completely capture the underlying phenomenon: a “refutation by implementation.”


Apophaticism in Practice

If the apophatic approach rejects the claim that computational models may exhibit consciousness, in what sense does the project of building such models produce knowledge about consciousness? More generally, is apophatic model validation genuinely scientific? We claim that apophatic science is structurally analogous to paradigmatic instances of scientific reasoning found in physics. After elaborating this conceptual point, we illustrate our view with some concrete examples of ongoing modeling projects in cognitive science that may be recast or reformed as fragments of an apophatic science of consciousness.


Apophatic consciousness science as a research program

We offer apophatic consciousness science as a “research program,” in the sense found in the history and philosophy of science (e.g., Laudan 1977; Lakatos 1978; Chang 2012; Smith 2014): a systematic and progressive project aimed at probing the limits of theory by constructing ever more refined models. Considered as a research program, apophatic consciousness science looks much more like paradigmatic instances of scientific inquiry, such as Newtonian astronomy or contemporary high-energy physics, than the traditional, reductive investigation of consciousness. As with any high-precision research project in the history of science, apophatic consciousness science continuously challenges the evidential support for its core theoretical commitment, in this case, the power of information processing to produce consciousness.

Likewise, just as the project of refining the evidence for Newtonian physics was coextensive with the project of finding high-quality evidence for its successor (Smith 2014), the project of building ever more refined computational models is constructive both for supporting computationalism and for supporting, even discovering, any successor theory of consciousness that may emerge in its wake. So long as computationalism provides the only lingua franca for unifying evidence from across the cognitive sciences into cognitive models, it is scientifically irrelevant whether we take its explanation of consciousness to be correct or not. As with Newtonian science in the 60-year interval between the discovery of the precession in the perihelion of Mercury and Einstein’s general relativity, we have no other choice than to continue to probe the limits of the only integrated empirical theory we have.

Of course, there is a glaring difference with the Newtonian case. We explicitly advocate a skeptical attitude toward the empirical adequacy of the computational account of consciousness, whereas nineteenth century astronomers held out hope that discovery of a new planet would explain Mercury’s apparent anomaly in Newtonian terms. Yet our choice here is purely pragmatic: as a matter of fact, computationalist theories of consciousness have proved themselves lax in probing their own limits, and all too willing to accept some particular robot or model as conscious (see below). What Newtonian science and contemporary particle physics exemplify is a strict self-discipline, a project to demand ever-increasing precision in one’s models without end, that we think computational cognitive science would do well to emulate.


Existing research reassessed apophatically

Although some researchers have claimed that their computational models are conscious, apophatic methodology reinterprets this work as identifying what consciousness is not. In particular, we claim that the ability to encode the core principles of a theory of consciousness within a computational model provides evidence that the theory is incomplete. The apophatic project does not interpret successful modeling of some consciousness-relevant phenomenon as a failure, but rather as an invitation for theorists to refine their views and for modelers to encode this refinement in future models. We illustrate the implications of the apophatic perspective by reinterpreting the contribution of some successful computational research programs.


Self-consciousness and the mirror test

An agent passes the mirror test if it attempts to investigate some mark placed in secret on a non-visible part of its body (e.g., a spot on its forehead) once it views itself in a mirror. Passing the mirror test has been taken as a behavioral signature of self-awareness, or even self-consciousness. Yet, Bringsjord et al. (2015) demonstrate that mirror test passing behavior can be implemented in artificial agents. Once we recognize that the agent passes the putative test through mechanical theorem-proving, the test’s relevance to “self-consciousness” seems to evaporate. Similar considerations apply to other robotic successes at passing this test, whether they employ simple circuits (Haikonen 2007) or neural nets (Takeno 2008; Torigoe et al. 2009).

In a proto-apophatic manner, Bringsjord, Haikonen, and Takeno all acknowledge their implementations reveal that passing the mirror test is too trivial to serve as a measure of consciousness, taking their robots as a starting point for further research. Yet, while Bringsjord is skeptical about consciousness in artificial agents, Haikonen and Takeno argue that the robots will achieve consciousness properly at a future stage of their projects. Hastily, Torigoe et al. (2009) already declare victory in this regard writing, “We have developed a robot that is capable of consciousness and emotions similar to humans,” because it implements a custom theory of consciousness (131). From an apophatic perspective, we applaud the progressive nature of these research programs, and take each step to constitute a kind of victory; not in producing consciousness, but in demonstrating an implemented theory of consciousness as inadequate.


Global Neuronal Workspace Theory and the Stroop task

Next, consider Stanislas Dehaene’s extension of the Global Workspace Theory of consciousness (Baars 1997) in his Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT) and its associated computational models. A GNWT model of the Stroop task (Dehaene et al. 1998) takes as input two sets of four nodes: one set standing for four possible color words and the other standing for four possible colors. The neural network is trained first to distinguish inputs from either set independently, then tasked to distinguish those from the “word” inputs when interference from the “color” inputs is sent, eventually learning the task after a period of error and “effort” closely mirroring the pattern seen in human subjects (Dehaene et al. 1998). Reflecting on this research, Dehaene reasons, like Torigoe, that since his model implements GNWT, it is conscious: “We call ‘conscious’ whichever representation, at a given time, wins the competition for access to this mental arena (i.e., the workspace) and gets selected for global sharing and decision-making” (Dehaene et al. 2017).

From the apophatic perspective, we must be more specific to discover what this model reveals about consciousness. On close inspection, the workspace of Dehaene’s model is a forum where vigilance and reward signals can be integrated with input signals through reinforcement learning rather than explicit rules. The model’s success illustrates on the one hand that the Stroop task can be learned without relying on explicit rule encodings (cf. Lovett 2005), and on the other hand that conscious awareness is not necessary for Stroop-like behavior. We applaud and encourage the project to develop GNWT models that encompass wider arrays of conscious-relevant phenomena, but the apophatic perspective views the claim that any particular model in this trajectory successfully implements consciousness proper as a hinderance rather than aid to pushing this project toward broader empirical scope and increased predictive precision.


Architectures for consciousness

The direct descendents of Newell’s call for integrated modeling are a series of attempts to systematically account for large segments of human behavior within unified “cognitive architectures” organized around a few core principles (Kotseruba and Tsotsos 2020). Long-running projects in this tradition, such as ACT-R (Anderson et al. 2004) and Soar (Laird 2012) initially proceeded independently, but have lately coalesced around a Common Model of Cognition (Laird et al. 2017), which both encompasses shared assumptions and identifies a systematic program for expanding the capacities of a cognitive architecture. These projects satisfy the requirements we lay out for systematic, progressive model building; however, they are not instances of the apophatic method insofar as decisions about which patterns of behavioral data to reproduce next are not driven in the first instance by the question of whether that behavior is consciousness-relevant. Our own research with a computational system called ARCADIA (Bridewell and Bello 2016a), which falls loosely in this tradition, more closely conforms to the apophatic method, as our decisions about how to expand the model are targeted at a sequence of phenomena (attention, inattentional blindness, intention, and awareness) deemed relevant for approaching a progressively richer sense of consciousness (Bridewell and Bello 2016a, b; Bridewell et al. 2018; Bello and Bridewell 2020).

Can an apophatic science of consciousness, realized in projects such as these, genuinely explain consciousness? We do not claim it will produce explanations of how phenomenal experience feels, or why it exists. But these explanatory demands do not have analogs in any quantitative science. If instead, we seek explanations like those we find in paradigmatic disciplines such as astronomy and particle physics, then the answer is yes. Quantitative physics does not answer nebulous, unqualified why questions; rather, it produces a subtle and precise knowledge, of the limits of certain explanatory hypotheses, of the extent to which the world fits our best attempts at modeling it. Apophatic consciousness science is no different. By following a trajectory of increasing fidelity to neural mechanisms, simulating an increasing breadth of behavioral data, we carve out an ever more ambitious and specific understanding of what consciousness is not.


Objections and Replies

In discussing the apophatic method with our colleagues, several comments and objections were echoed by multiple voices. To clarify our proposal and to address concerns that readers may have, we list four typical questions that we have received and include our replies.


Is the claim: solve the easy problems first, and that will solve the hard problem?

Canonically the “easy” problems of consciousness concern consciousness-relevant phenomena, such as the reportability of mental states or the control of behavior, that may be investigated intersubjectively and explained mechanistically. The “hard” problem is the problem of explaining how (or why) physical processes give rise to phenomenal experience at all (Chalmers 1996).

Throughout our positive presentation of apophatic model validation, we have deliberately avoided the terminology of “easy” and “hard” problems. We are happy to accept a distinction between questions that may be answered empirically, through the methods of science, and those that cannot. The view outlined here is concerned purely with consciousness considered as a topic for scientific investigation. We do not wish to deny that there may be further, conceptual or metaphysical questions about consciousness that fall outside the purview of science. On which side of this boundary does the “hard” problem fall? It seems to us that the literature is unclear on this point, and this is why we have resisted the terminology of easy versus hard.

Insofar as the hard problem is understood as the question of how to empirically investigate subjectively accessible phenomenal experience, then we do intend apophatic science to make progress on it—not merely, nor in the first instance, by solving “easy” problems, but rather by systematically integrating piecemeal models of “easy” phenomena associated with consciousness into larger and more comprehensive models. Insofar as the hard problem is genuinely understood as a why question—why do certain physical states give rise to consciousness?—then we do not pretend to address it here, because it does not strike us as an empirical question. Why do massed bodies attract each other? This is not the question addressed by the theory of gravity; rather it gives us a quantitative account of the conditions under which massed bodies do attract each other.


How is this different from heterophenomenology?

The claim that there is any scientifically relevant “hard problem” of consciousness has influentially been rejected by Daniel Dennett. Instead, he advocates studying consciousness through a procedure he calls heterophenomenology (Dennett 1991), which treats the verbal reports of subjects describing their inner experiences as intersubjectively legitimate data. Computational models of inner experience may be derived from careful analysis of these reports, and then, insofar as possible, checked against properties of physical correlates, potentially rejecting or amending the models on that basis. The key point being that verbal reports are not taken as veridical descriptions of the mechanisms of thought, but only descriptions of a person’s (imperfect) experience of those mechanisms.

For the most part, we agree with Dennett about the status of data. Like Dennett, we defend the legitimacy of intersubjectively accessible data as relevant to consciousness science and reject any push from mysterians or dualists that these data cannot be used to target consciousness at all. Moreover, we agree on the evidential importance of verbal reports, despite the fact that they are at most fragmentary and defeasible descriptions of experience and not necessarily an accurate report of mental processes.

However, we disagree with Dennett insofar as he sees no particular problem in validating models of consciousness by appealing to such data. Dennett views qualitative models of consciousness as validated in a traditional manner, through matching predictions with data: metacontrast masking and Libet’s neurosurgical experiments confirm his multiple-drafts model of consciousness and disconfirm the Cartesian theater (1991, Chapter 6). An implication is that Dennett takes successful implementation of a model that reproduces the full panoply of consciousness-relevant phenomena to exhaustively explain consciousness (ibid., Chapters 12–14), whereas for us, there remains a principled evidential gap between the subjective and the intersubjective. An apophatic interpretation of Dennett’s hypothetical sequence of models would take them as progressively shrinking the set of phenomena that are constitutively dependent upon consciousness.


How do researchers stay motivated?

Some colleagues have expressed concern that our view is too pessimistic. If every model that accounts for consciousness-relevant phenomena will be treated as “not conscious,” then why bother building models at all? It seems as if under an apophatic science of consciousness the only way that a modeler can win is to not play the game. Addressing this concern requires a shift in perspective. Instead of asking whether a given model is conscious, we ask whether a particular consciousness-relevant phenomenon can be modeled at all. Or, more broadly, we wonder whether that phenomenon can be modeled in a way that is integrated into a model that also accounts for other proposed phenomena. Success is not guaranteed.

Moreover, success is by no means the most desirable outcome. Consider another analogy with physics: the “discovery” of the Higgs boson. The vast majority of physicists expected this final prediction of the Standard Model to be confirmed and would have been shocked if it had not. Anecdotally, however, their heartfelt hope was that the Higgs would not be found at the expected energy levels, or found, but with quite different properties than predicted (Kolbert 2012; Madrigal 2012). Why? Although the Standard Model is the most empirically confirmed theory in the history of science, there have been conceptual doubts since its very inception that it could possibly be correct as a description of fundamental reality (Weinberg 1997). Failure to find the Higgs, or for its properties to match predictions, would be evidence for the successor to the Standard Model. Without such evidence, in the form of disconfirmations or violated expectations, the search for a fundamental theory is in evidential limbo.

Cognitive science today is a more exciting field than fundamental physics, in part because of the great uncertainty at every turn. The possibility of consciousness-relevant phenomena that cannot be addressed through the methods of computationalism is ever present. On the one hand, this possibility challenges modelers to simulate increasingly sophisticated portfolios of conscious phenomena. On the other hand, experimentalists may be driven to seek a class of phenomena that can be specified well enough to be a legitimate target for modeling but that resists sustained efforts to encode and reproduce it. Such a discovery would identify the limits of computationalism and could point toward its most promising successor.

This observation also answers a frequently asked corollary to the question of motivation: when does an apophatic scientist know that they are done? We noticed a strong concern that researchers might one day build a model of consciousness, and the apophatic method would prevent its recognition. We suggest that there are two indicators that the research program is exhausted. First, experimentalists may no longer be able to identify new consciousness-relevant phenomena, in which case the methodological constraints of apophaticism will need to be reconsidered, and perhaps abandoned. Second, computational modelers may be challenged by a phenomenon that they cannot satisfactorily capture. In that case, we may have identified a feature of consciousness (e.g., a function, a behavioral pattern) that enables us to reject computationalism as a viable project and can serve as an evidential benchmark for its successor.


What if the model really is conscious?

One worry that has been raised about our response regarding motivation is that apophatic science may overshoot its target: what if an early model, while failing to reproduce known consciousness-relevant phenomena, is nevertheless in fact conscious? It is worth reaffirming here that the apophatic precept is a methodological stipulation. Asserting that all successful computational implementations are not themselves conscious has value insofar as it establishes a clear route for iterative model improvement. It is not meant as a factual test, and indeed to take it as such would be to take on some of the very metaphysical assumptions we hope to avoid.

Suppose a computational model achieves consciousness. In order to be evidentially useful for a science of consciousness, there must be some method for (a) validating the model as conscious and (b) iteratively generating more data (through testing the model, or building successors similar in relevant respects) in order to improve quantitative predictions. We have argued above that traditional methods of model evaluation are inadequate to this task. So, the example is only relevant to the science of consciousness if an alternative to apophatic model validation that satisfies (a) and (b) is on offer. We would welcome such an alternative.

In our view, the real concern behind the possibility of an unrecognized conscious model is ethical. Destructively manipulating, erasing, or storing in isolation from any stimuli—the kinds of actions one might perform on an obsolete model—would be construed as malicious or harmful if performed on a conscious agent. We take this ethical consideration to be completely orthogonal to methodological and empirical considerations. We do not reject its importance, but rather assume that it will be dealt with by the broader social context in which the scientific community is embedded. Here, apophatic science is no different from any other empirical project. If widespread attitudes toward the ethical standing of artificial agents change, then the permissibility of existing modes of research may change, as it has in the case of animal experimentation.


Conclusion: Everything Old Is New Again

Consciousness is a phenomenon characterized by features (subjective perspective and phenomenal character) that appear intrinsically immune to the intersubjective methods of science. Two responses to this conundrum have dominated previous debates. On the one hand, denial: reductive functionalism simply ignores these characteristic features, and baldly asserts that intersubjectively available patterns in information processing may be identified with consciousness. On the other hand, mysterianism: critics of reductionism have embraced an unsolvable “hard problem” that falls beyond the bounds of science and may only be addressed through metaphysical speculation.

The apophatic approach suggests a path forward: take the intersubjective methods of computational cognitive science to provide negative data on consciousness. We need not posit a reductive theory of consciousness to make progress on what consciousness is not. Rather, by constructing models that simulate consciousness-relevant behavior by implementing consciousness-relevant mechanisms, we can show in increasing detail the space of what can be accomplished without consciousness and thereby delineate the boundaries of consciousness as a natural phenomenon from without. In this manner, the apophatic scientist systematically chips away at the cognitive, intentional, and functional roles assigned to consciousness until all that remains is either an empty set or a circumscribed core that cannot be reduced to computational implementation. The former case would empirically vindicate methodological computationalism, and arguably change our intuitions about its reductive cousin, functionalism, while the latter would constitute a “crisis” in consciousness science (Kuhn 1970).

The apophatic method is radical insofar as it rejects the implicit functionalism that has dominated the scientific study of consciousness. Yet it is conservative insofar as it endorses the methodological computationalism that rests at the very origins of interdisciplinary cognitive science. Consequently, we suspect that much previous work on consciousness can be imported wholesale into the apophatic project. It would be a mistake to think there are no implications from the apophatic perspective for how consciousness science should proceed, however. One implication is that the project to find maximally specific neural correlates of consciousness does not seem particularly important, because isolated information processing mechanisms cannot do much explanatory work in apophatic science, which aims for richly integrated models. Likewise, there are implications for the practice of computational modeling itself. Isolated, function-specific models cannot say anything about consciousness on this perspective. Rather, only models that fall within a trajectory of increasing precision and richness as part of an expanding research program progress toward an understanding of consciousness.

We wish consciousness science to take itself seriously as a science, and this means holding itself to progressively higher standards of precision and detail when evaluating the fit between model and data. Reductive accounts fail this criterion, as they assert a link between consciousness and its correlates that cannot be validated empirically, and thus cannot be iteratively challenged and improved. In contrast, methodological computationalism, validated apophatically, is a project susceptible to iterative model improvement, and increase in precision and detail. The apophatic turn renders the science of consciousness scientific at last.


Sensing and seeing associated with overlapping occipitoparietal activation in simultaneous EEG-fMRI

Catriona L Scrivener, Asad Malik, Michael Lindner, Etienne B Roesch — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8216203, CC BY 4.0.

The presence of a change in a visual scene can influence brain activity and behavior, even in the absence of full conscious report. It may be possible for us to sense that such a change has occurred, even if we cannot specify exactly where or what it was. Despite existing evidence from electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye-tracking data, it is still unclear how this partial level of awareness relates to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) activation. Using EEG, fMRI, and a change blindness paradigm, we found multi-modal evidence to suggest that sensing a change is distinguishable from being blind to it. Specifically, trials during which participants could detect the presence of a colour change but not identify the location of the change (sense trials), were compared to those where participants could both detect and localise the change (localise or see trials), as well as change blind trials. In EEG, late parietal positivity and N2 amplitudes were larger for localised changes only, when compared to change blindness. However, ERP-informed fMRI analysis found no voxels with activation that significantly co-varied with fluctuations in single-trial late positivity amplitudes. In fMRI, a range of visual (BA17,18), parietal (BA7,40), and mid-brain (anterior cingulate, BA24) areas showed increased fMRI BOLD activation when a change was sensed, compared to change blindness. These visual and parietal areas are commonly implicated as the storage sites of visual working memory, and we therefore argue that sensing may not be explained by a lack of stored representation of the visual display. Both seeing and sensing a change were associated with an overlapping occipitoparietal network of activation when compared to blind trials, suggesting that the quality of the visual representation, rather than the lack of one, may result in partial awareness during the change blindness paradigm.

Keywords: EEG-fMRI, change blindness, sensing, conscious awareness


Introduction

It is common for us to overestimate the amount of information that we can process and store about the world around us. Although we may assume that we would notice a cyclist entering the path of our car, or if a building on our street changed in colour, we very often miss these occurrences (Simons and Levin, 1997; Simons, 2000). The failure to detect changes between visual scenes is known as change blindness, and is used as evidence to suggest that our internal representation of the outside world is not as complete as once thought (Noe et al., 2000; Rensink, 2004). When changes to an image are disrupted in some way, for example by a distractor image or a visual saccade, we cannot use visual transients (or motion) to detect them, and are often blind to the difference (Rensink et al., 1997; Kanai and Verstraten, 2004).

It was previously assumed that if we are blind to a change then we cannot provide any information about it, and that the change should not influence our behavior in any way. Blindness to changes is thought to result from a lack of detailed representation about the pre- and post-change scenes, or an inability to successfully compare the two (Simons, 2000). If this is the case, then our knowledge when we are blind to changes should be equivalent to that when there is no change at all. Anecdotally, this does not align with the experience of observers in a change blindness experiment; it is common for them to remark that they suspected something had changed, but that they were not sure about its nature or location. This experience appears to be phenomenologically different from complete change blindness, but how this difference is reflected in behavioral and neuroimaging data is unclear.

In the domain of visual consciousness, there is a recurring debate on the nature of visual awareness; whether it is graded, or dichotomous, or a combination determined by the context. In the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Dehaene et al., 2006), it is posited that awareness arises when inputs cross a threshold for “ignition,” resulting in the distribution and maintenance of information within a “global workspace.” Based on this proposal, conscious awareness is a dichotomous state, as only inputs selected by attention can spark the activation of the global workspace. This consists of a large network of connected regions, including prefrontal and parietal regions as well as the thalamic nuclei and basal ganglia (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). Therefore, conscious awareness requires directed attention and activation of a distributed frontal-parietal network, in an “all-or-nothing” fashion.

In accordance with this, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies specifically investigating change blindness report that detected changes are associated with greater activation in the parietal lobe, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and fusiform gyrus, when compared to changes that are missed (Beck et al., 2001). Few regions were specifically activated when participants exhibited change blindness compared to no-change trials (right lingual gyrus, right fusiform gyrus, and right inferior frontal gyrus). Further, detected changes compared with correctly categorized no-change trials revealed activation in a wider network including the inferior, superior, and medial temporal gyrus, anterior interparietal sulcus, precuneus, central sulcus, inferior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), putamen, pulvinar, and cerebellum (Pessoa and Ungerleider, 2004). A similar pattern was identified for false alarm trials, where participants reported a change when no change occurred, suggesting that activity was related to the participants’ perception of the change rather than properties of the visual stimulus.

However, this “all-or-nothing” explanation of visual awareness does not align with our subjective experience of the world. Based on participants’ report of a sense for something changing, we might conclude that awareness is graded. This allows for a level, or levels, of awareness lying somewhere on a continuum between full and absent awareness. In an early experiment, Rensink (2004) suggested the presence of a sense condition, in which observers could detect a change without fully identifying it. Observers were asked to indicate when they “thought” that something had changed, and then again when they were certain of it. He argued that this sense condition is both phenomenologically and perceptually distinct from the traditionally reported see condition in which participants are fully aware of what change occurred.

This definition has been extended and explored using electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye-tracking, with a range of results suggesting a richer visual experience than either “yes I saw a change” or “no I didn’t see anything” (Thornton and Fernandez-Duque, 2001; Fernandez-Duque and Thornton, 2003; Galpin et al., 2008; Kimura et al., 2008; Busch et al., 2009; Lyyra et al., 2012; Howe and Webb, 2014; Reynolds and Withers, 2015; Chetverikov et al., 2018). The distinction could be described by the “partial awareness hypothesis” (Kouider and Dehaene, 2007; Kouider et al., 2010). While the mechanism of awareness can still be considered dichotomous and dependent on an ignition threshold, the level of detail contained within the workspace is variable. Stimuli can be represented with varying detail, based on factors such as stimulus strength, therefore giving rise to graded knowledge of its contents.

In a previous EEG experiment (Scrivener et al., 2019), we distinguished between trials in which participants could detect the presence of a colour change but not identify the location of the change (sense trials), versus those where participants could both detect, and localise the change (localise trials). We chose to measure several ERPs that are commonly linked to visual attention and awareness, including the visual P1 and N1, visual awareness negativity (VAN), N2pc, and late positivity (LP) (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010; Förster et al., 2020). Although suggested as one of the earliest reflection of conscious visual awareness (around 200 ms after stimulus onset), we found no statistically significant differences in the VAN ERP across conditions, contrary to previous findings (Wilenius and Revonsuo, 2007; Koivisto et al., 2008; Busch et al., 2009; Förster et al., 2020).

In a similar time window, the N2pc is characterized by an increased negativity at visual electrodes contralateral to the change location, and is increased for aware versus unaware trials (Luck and Hillyard, 1994; Schankin and Wascher, 2007). In our previous results, both awareness conditions (localise and sense) were significantly different to trials with no change detection (blind trials), suggesting that the N2pc is not dependent on explicit awareness. It is possible that sense trials elicited a shift in attention to the correct hemifield of change (and therefore an N2pc was detected), but that this was not specific enough to determine the exact location of the change.

Within the LP range (400–600 ms after change onset), all conditions were significantly different from one another. The LP overlaps with the P3 component at central parietal electrode sites, and is often associated with conscious aspects of task processing (Busch et al., 2009; Koivisto et al., 2009; Railo et al., 2011). Overall, it appears that simply “detecting” a change can be distinguished from “describing” a change, in both subjective and neuroimaging results, and that participants can sense a change without complete knowledge of what occurred.

The main aim of this experiment was to examine the existence and nature of the sense condition in the change blindness paradigm, using combined EEG-fMRI and behavioral measures. While a range of evidence posits a distinction between sense and blind conditions in EEG data, no such distinction has been made for the sense condition in change blindness using fMRI. One criticism of the sensing hypothesis is that participants who sense a change are simply applying a more liberal response criterion when completing the task, and in fact are not aware of the change at all (Simons et al., 2005). Similarly, implicit awareness of changes could also be explained by explicit mechanisms such as guessing or a process of elimination (Mitroff et al., 2002). If this is the case, then we would expect to find no significant differences between sense and blind trials in fMRI BOLD activation. This result could also support the hypothesis of visual consciousness as dichotomous. However, if sensing lies somewhere on a continuum between aware and unaware, perhaps explained by varying precision of the stimuli representation within the global workspace, then BOLD activation for sense trials may be separable to both fully aware and change blind trials.

Further, we aimed to improve the respective temporal and spatial resolution of EEG and fMRI by measuring them simultaneously. In an extension to our previous EEG results (Scrivener et al., 2019), we investigated how EEG correlates of visual awareness relate to changes in fMRI BOLD. We therefore aimed to identify brain regions with BOLD activity that co-varied with activity in the EEG data, to detect possible sources or networks associated with awareness of changes.


Materials and Methods

All materials and analysis methods were pre-registered in an open document on the Open Science Framework, where the data and analysis for this project can also be found (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/W6BH3). Structural images were defaced using Brainstorm3 (Tadel et al., 2011) in MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc., version 2014a) with SPM8.


Participants

Twenty one right-handed subjects (mean ± SD, age = 21 ± 3.6, 6 male) with no history of psychiatric or neurological disorders participated in this EEG-fMRI study. All had corrected-to-normal vision and were not colour blind (based on self-report). The experiment was approved by the University of Reading ethics committee (UREC: 16/120), and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (as of 2008). All participants gave informed consent to take part, including consent to share their anonymized data. For EEG and behavioral analysis, one participant was removed due to failure to remove MRI related artifacts from the EEG, leaving N = 20. Four additional participants were removed from the fMRI and EEG-fMRI analysis for having motion greater than one voxel size in the fMRI data, leaving N = 16.


Stimuli and procedure

A change blindness task was presented using Psychtoolbox (Kleiner et al., 2007), on a 1920 x 1080 LCD monitor with a 60 Hz refresh rate. The paradigm was displayed on a screen approximately 47 cm away from the center of the scanner bore. This was viewed by the participant through a mirror mounted onto the coil, at approximately 12 cm from the participant’s eyes. In their left hand, the participant held an alarm ball, and in their right they held a four key button box. They had to use all of the four keys to respond to the task. Participants were asked to fixate on a central fixation cross and identify changes between consecutive displays of coloured squares. These were interrupted by a short fixation display to facilitate the change blindness phenomenon (see for details on display duration). On change trials, one of the squares changed colour from the first to the second display. On no-change trials, the displays were identical. This was followed by two or three questions, depending on the participant’s response to the first question.

Question 1 asked “Did you see a change?” to which participants could respond “yes” or “no.” Question 2 asked participants to localise the change, based on a 2 x 2 grid from top left to bottom right. Question 3 asked how certain participants were of their responses, ranging from “1: Very Uncertain” to “4: Very Certain.” If participants responded “no” change to question 1, they were asked to press any button to ensure the same number of button presses were made during each trial. We did not ask participants who did not see the change to guess a location, as our hypotheses did not relate to “implicit” change detection, as reported in Fernandez-Duque and Thornton (2000). Participants were asked to respond within a limit of 2 s for each question, and trials with any response missing were not included in further analysis.

This study had a within-subjects repeated measures design, and each participant completed 5 blocks of 50 trials, meaning a total of 250 trials. Of these 250 trials, 165 contained a change in coloured square, and the remaining trials contain no change. These trial numbers were selected after consideration of the maximum amount of time participants would be willing and able to attend to the task, especially with concurrent neuroimaging recording. The ratio was not kept at 50/50, as the trials containing the change were of most interest for analysis (Fernandez-Duque and Thornton, 2003; Howe and Webb, 2014). However, after the experiment participants were asked to report the percentage of trials that they believed contained a change (none of which were correct). After each block of 50 trials, the participants were presented with a break screen, advising them to take a break. The participant was able to continue the experiment at their discretion by pressing any button on the button box. Before beginning the main task, participants were given a short block of 10 trials in which to practice responding to the paradigm with the button box. The data from this practice block was not analysed.

Difficulty was modulated in real time by adding and removing two squares from the display, based on the assumption that more distractors increases task difficulty (Vogel et al., 2005). This was to prevent floor and ceiling performance during the task as a result of individual differences (Luck and Vogel, 2013), and optimize for performance rather than to establish specific individual thresholds. Performance over the previous two trials was used to update the current trial; two consecutive correct answers added two squares, two incorrect deducted two squares, and one correct and one incorrect resulted in no change. The decision to increase or decrease the number of squares was made using responses to the localization question (Q2), as we were specifically interested in controlling the number of sense and localise trials. The number of squares always changed by two, to balance the number on the left and right hemifields of the screen. The location of the change on each trial was random, but the change occurred an equal number of times on the left and right side. The display was divided into 36 even sections, with 6 in each quadrant, and within which the squares could appear. As the colour of the squares was not related to our main hypotheses, we used seven default MATLAB colours; blue, cyan, yellow, green, white, red, and magenta (MathWorks, Inc., version 2016b).


Behavioral analysis

The trials in which a change occurred were divided into three conditions: blind (no change detection), localise (change detection and localization), and sense (change detection without localization). Trials in which no change occurred were divided into correct rejection (no change reported) and false alarm (change incorrectly reported). The number of false alarm trials was low, with a mean of 10 trials (range, SD = 7.34), and therefore EEG analysis comparing false alarm to sense trials was not performed due to a lack of power. The percentage of false alarm trials was calculated in relation to the total number of no-change trials, whereas the percentage of sense trials was calculated in relation to the total number of change trials.

Detection accuracy for each participant was calculated based on the percentage of change trials in which they correctly detected a change. Localization accuracy was calculated as the percentage of correctly detected changes where the localization was also correct. We also recorded each participant’s mean and maximum difficulty scores, with the maximum referring to the highest number of squares that were displayed to them during the experiment. Behavioral analysis was completed in JASP 2018 (version 0.8.2.0).

D’prime was calculated as a measure of participant response bias. This was calculated using the equation hit ratefalse alarm rate (Stanislaw and Todorov, 1999). Response bias, or criterion, was also calculated, where hit ratefalse alarm rate. c = 0 indicates no response bias to either “yes” or “no” responses. c > 0 indicates a bias toward “no” responses, with fewer hits, and fewer false alarms. c < 0 indicates bias toward “yes,” with more hits but also more false alarms.

One problem faced in identifying a sense condition is that it is difficult to distinguish these trials from those where participants did not really see a change (similar to a false alarm during no change trials), or those where participants press the wrong response key (Mitroff et al., 2002; Simons and Ambinder, 2005). Rensink (2004) found that reaction times when participants thought that they had seen a change were shorter for change trials than no-change trials, meaning that participants were slower when they were simply making a false alarm. Galpin et al. (2008) also found greater certainty associated with sensing during change trials, compared to false alarms. We therefore compared reaction times across awareness conditions, as well as between levels of confidence. As trial numbers were low, “very uncertain” and “uncertain” responses were combined, and “certain” and “very certain” were combined. Each awareness condition therefore had two levels of certainty; for example, localise certain and localise uncertain.

To establish if the location of the change influenced the likelihood that it was detected, we conducted two chi-square analyses. The first analysis divided the 6 x 6 grid of possible change locations into two conditions, outside and central. Changes occurring in any of the 20 outermost locations were considered to be outside changes, and the 16 central locations were considered to be central. We ran a 2 x 3 chi-square with the independent variables of location (outside/central) and awareness (blind/localise/sense), and the dependent variable as the frequency of trials within each condition, across participants. In the second analysis, we instead compared the side of the display in which the change occurred, resulting in a 2 x 3 chi-square for hemisphere (left/right) and awareness (blind/localise/sense).

A chi-square test was used to compare the frequency of each colour change occurring across awareness conditions (see/blind). Due to the large number of possible random colour changes, localise, and sense trials were combined into see trials. Each possible colour change was coded with a number between 1 and 21, such that a change in either direction was coded with the same number. colour changes with an adjusted standardized residual >1.96 were considered to have a significant difference frequency across conditions (Agresti, 2003).


EEG data acquisition

EEG data was recorded with an MRI-compatible cap equipped with carbon-wired Ag/AgCL electrodes (Braincap MR) from 64 scalp positions according to the international 10-10 system. The reference electrode was placed at FCz and the ground at AFz. An additional ECG electrode was positioned on the back to measure heart rate. An MRI-compatible EEG amplifier was used (Brain-Amp MR, Brain Products) with a sampling rate of 5000 Hz. This was positioned at the back of the scanner bore and connected using ribbon cables that were secured with sandbags. Impedance was kept below 10 kΩ for EEG channels and 5 kΩ for the ECG. EEG recordings were performed with Brain Vision Recorder Software (Brain Products) and timings kept constant using a Brain Products SyncBox to synchronize EEG with the MRI system clock.


EEG pre-processing

Raw EEG data was pre-processed using Brain Vision Analyzer version 2.1 (Brain Products). Correction for the MR gradient artifact was performed using a baseline corrected sliding average of MR volumes (Allen et al., 2000). Removal of cardioballistic artifacts involved the subtraction of heartbeat artifacts on a second by second basis, using a sliding average of 21 (Allen et al., 1998). The delay was detected using the CBC detection solution, individually for each subject. Peaks were detected semi-automatically, with a manual check of the algorithm’s estimations. Independent component analysis (ICA) (Infomax; Bell and Sejnowski, 1995) was then used to remove further BCG residual artifacts (range: 1–4 additional independent components (ICs) removed per participant). As outlined in Debener (2005), the presence of visual P1 and N1 peaks in the averaged data after pre-processing was used as an indication of the successful removal of artifacts.

The data was downsampled to 500 Hz to reduce computation time and then filtered with a high-pass filter of 0.1 Hz to remove low frequency drift (Butterworth, second order). Contrary to the pre-registration, a low-pass filter of 40 Hz (rather than 50 Hz) and a notch filter of 50 Hz were chosen to remove line noise. We used a lower cutoff frequency given the extent of high-frequency noise in the EEG data, some of which was related to the helium pump artifact. An ideal low-pass filter should remove all 50 Hz line noise, however, an additional notch filter was included to remove any residual noise at this frequency. ICA was used to remove eye-movement artifacts (Infomax; Bell and Sejnowski, 1995). Two components were removed for each participant; one corresponding to eye-blinks and the other to lateralized eye-movements.

Further analysis was completed using EEGLab (Delorme and Makeig, 2004). Trials were marked as outliers if any ERP value was >3 SDs from the mean value of that ERP across all trials (using the MATLAB function “isoutlier”). Note that we only searched for outliers in the electrodes used for analysis (P07, P08, Cz, Pz, and CPz). Trials marked as containing outliers were excluded from further analysis (M = 7 trials, SD = 12.98), as well as those where a response to any question was not made within the response time (M = 2 trials). This step also differed slightly from the pre-registration, where we originally planned to use the data inspection feature in Brain Vision Analyzer to remove unwanted trials. However, we decided to use a more specific outlier detection method, focusing on the electrodes and time windows that were used in the analysis. We therefore chose not to remove trials where the artifacts were contained within one or two electrodes that were not used in the analysis, as this would have reduced the number of available trials.

Segments were then taken from –200 ms to 7000 ms to include the whole trial, and baseline corrected using a mean of the data within –200 ms to 0 ms, where 0 ms was the start of the first display of coloured squares. We chose the baseline period to be before the first display onset, rather than the second, as we were interested in visual ERPs that occurred in response to the both displays. It has also been suggested that ERPs in response to the first presentation of stimuli are related to the subsequent perception of change (Pourtois et al., 2006).


EEG analysis

To identify the peaks of the visually evoked potentials (P1 and N1), a grand average ERP was calculated across all conditions and participants, as advised in Luck and Gaspelin (2017), from electrodes P07 and P08. From here, the peaks of interest were determined by identifying the local maxima/minima of the expected peaks, using the peak detection function in BrainVision Analyzer. The mean value within a window around the peak was used instead of the peak value, as the mean is more robust against noise (Luck, 2014). A window of 40 ms around the mean was chosen as the appropriate window for visual ERPs P1 and N1. In relation to the first display onset, the first P1 was identified at 124 ms, and the first N1 at 142 ms. In relation to the second display onset, the second P1 was identified at 108 ms, and the second N1 at 168 ms.

Based on previous literature (Fernandez-Duque et al., 2003; Busch et al., 2010; Tseng et al., 2012), the N2pc was defined as the mean within 200–400 ms after the second display at occipital electrodes PO7 and PO8. Over central parietal electrodes Cz, CPz, and Pz, the VAN was defined within a window of 130–330 ms after the second display, and the LP within a window of 400–600 ms. We used window sizes of 200 ms, defined a-priori, in an attempt to be conservative given the large variation within the literature.

To assess how differences between early visual components across detection conditions were reflected at each stimulus presentation, P1, and N1 amplitudes were compared in two separate 2 x 3 repeated measures ANOVAs, with display (first/second), and awareness (blind/localise/sense) as the independent variables. Differences across hemispheres in the N2pc were analysed with another 2 x 3 repeated measures ANOVA, with the independent variables of hemisphere (contralateral/ipsilateral), and awareness (blind/localise/sense). Amplitudes of the VAN and the LP were compared in two separate repeated measures ANOVAs with awareness (blind/localise/sense) as the independent variable. Where Mauchly’s Test of Sphericity indicated that the assumption had been violated, Greenhouse-Geisser correction was used. All post-hoc comparisons were two-tailed, and corrected for multiple comparisons using false discovery rate where q = 0.05 (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Effect sizes are reported as partial eta squared for ANOVA, and repeated measures Hedge’s g for t-tests (Lakens, 2013).


Single-trial EEG analysis

As listed a-priori in our pre-registration document on the OSF, we used two methods to extract the single-trial ERP values. The first method used the raw EEG time series, while the second used EEG values extracted from the ICA component with maximum correlation with our ERP of interest. Our reason for using both methods was to increase our sensitivity for extracting meaningful single-trial values, given the reduced signal to noise ratio in EEG data recorded inside the MR environment.

Raw values: for each ERP time window, single-trial values were calculated as the mean amplitude within the predefined window for that peak. These values were then baseline corrected by subtracting the mean amplitude within the 200 ms window before the onset of the first display. We also ran a version of this analysis where single-trial values were baseline corrected using the mean of the trial from which they were taken, in an attempt to prevent any remaining linear trends in the data influencing the general linear model (GLM) model. However, this did not affect the results. Outliers were identified as trials where the amplitude was more than 3 SDs away from the mean amplitude for that ERP. As large artifacts can raise the mean amplitude, we added the additional classification of outliers at values +/– 30 μV. These outlier values were replaced by the mean value across all other trials, as outlined in Bénar et al. (2007).

ICA derived values: this method was similar to that mentioned above, with the exception that the single-trial values were taken from a single ICA component, identified separately for each participant. First, ICA was computed on the pre-processed data for a single subject (FastICA in EEGLab; Hyvärinen and Oja, 1997). For each IC extracted, a mean IC-ERP was calculated by averaging the time course across all trials. The average IC-ERP time courses were then correlated with the average ERP time course from the electrodes of interest in the pre-processed EEG data; for the LP this was the average ERP from the central electrodes (Cz, Pz, and CPz). The IC component with the highest correlation with the ERP of interest was inspected to ensure that the topology was as expected; for the LP this was positivity over the central electrodes. Once selected, the single-trial values were extracted from the time series of this component, as described above. For some participants, the IC with the highest correlation was an artifact component, identified by visually inspecting the component’s time series, topography, and frequency spectrum in EEGLab. We also utilized the EEGLab function “ICLabel” to aid classification of artifact components. When this was the case (three participants), the IC with the next highest correlation was selected for that participant.


fMRI recording

MRI data was acquired using a 3.0-T whole-body MRI scanner (Prisma, Siemens) and a 64 channel coil for functional imaging. Interleaved slices were recorded using a 2D echo planar imaging sequence [repetition time (TR) 1630 ms; echo time (TE) 30 ms; flip angle 90°; voxel size 3 x 3 mm; gap 3 mm; encoding direction A to P; distance factor 20%; FOV read 192 mm; number of slices 30; transversal orientation]. Three dummy scans were acquired at the beginning of each block. As well as the functional scans, an anatomical scan of the entire brain was acquired [3D MPRAGE; saggital; TE 2.37 ms; TR 1800 ms; flip angle 8°; voxel size 0.98 x 0.98 mm; FOV read 250 mm; slice thickness 0.85 mm; slices per slab 208; ascending acquisition; phase encoding direction A to P].


fMRI pre-processing

MRI images were pre-processed using the procedure recommended in SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, London, UK). Functional images were first re-aligned per experimental block. These were registered to the mean image with a sixth degree spline interpolation. Following this was co-registration of the structural image to aligned functional images, segmentation of white and gray matter, normalization of functional images using the deformation field created during segmentation, and normalization of the functional to structural. The resulting data was smoothed with a 4-mm full-width-half-maximum Gaussian Kernel, and a high-pass filter with a cut off period of 128 s was applied. The registration of images was checked visually at each stage. Parameters not specified here can be assumed as the default SPM parameters.


fMRI analysis

During first-level analysis, GLMs with event-related designs were conducted in SPM12, to identify voxels activated in response to trial type (blind/localise/sense/false alarm/correct rejection). Regressors were created for each trial type by convolving the stimulus onset times with the canonical hemodynamic response function across all blocks (Friston et al., 1994). Each regressor had a duration matched to the length of visual display, and serial correlations were corrected using the AR(1) method. All fMRI analysis was conducted in relation to the onset of the second display, where the change could occur. However, given the fast presentation of the two displays, it is possible that activation from the first display contributed to the activation recorded during the second. Each block was modeled with a separate set of regressors including time derivatives, as we did not perform slice time correction. Six motion regressors were added as nuisance variables.

For each participant we ran the following contrasts during first-level analysis; sense > blind, localise > blind, localise > sense, blind > no-change, sense > false alarm, and false alarm > sense. We then compared awareness conditions at the second-level using one-sample t-tests. These contrasts were not run in the other direction, for example blind > localise, given previous results that suggest very little activation present for blind trials (Beck et al., 2001; Pessoa and Ungerleider, 2004). An additional paired-samples t-test was used to identify voxels with activation that was significantly different between the pair of contrasts localise > blind and sense > blind.

The contrasts localise > blind and sense > blind should reveal voxels with activation specific to full or partial awareness of the change, respectively, compared to no awareness. As these three conditions all contain a change in coloured squares, differences between them should reflect the participant’s level of awareness. Previous fMRI contrasts for change detection (detected versus undetected) have identified activation specific to awareness of the change in the bilateral parietal lobe, right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and right fusiform gyrus (Beck et al., 2001). The corresponding contrast here is localise > blind, where we may expect to find similar frontal and parietal activations.

As previously discussed, it is unclear whether the contrast sense > blind will result in similar activations, or whether the sense condition is simply another form of change blindness that can be explained by overconfidence or participant guessing. The contrast between sense and false alarm trials is useful to determine if sensing is similar to false alarms, meaning that participants did not detect anything changing during the change trials and were overconfident in their awareness.

In the contrast localise > sense, we should identify voxels specifically activated when participants can both detect and localise the change, compared to only change detection. These areas would therefore be indicated in the facilitation of complete visual awareness, compared to sensing alone. Contrasting blind and no-change trials should reveal activation specific to the presence of the change, despite the participant being unable to detect it. Previous results for this contrast suggest activation in the right lingual gyrus, right fusiform gyrus, and right inferior frontal gyrus (Beck et al., 2001).

To identify voxels with activation that correlated with the change in task difficulty over time, a separate GLM model was constructed with one regressor for the onsets of all trials, and a parametric regressor using the difficulty (or number of squares presented) at each trial. To identify voxels with activation that correlated with the change in participant certainty over time, a separate GLM model was constructed with one regressor for the onsets of all trials, and a parametric regressor using the certainty value reported by the participant at each trial.

Across all fMRI analyses, we report clusters with a minimum size of 20 voxels and a cluster-level family-wise error (FWE) corrected p < 0.001. Extended local maxima were labeled using two methods that provided overlapping results; the automated anatomical labeling toolbox in SPM (12), with a local maximum radius of 5 mm, and the SPM Anatomy toolbox, which for compatibility reasons used an older version of MATLAB (2014a) and SPM (SPM8). MNI co-ordinates were used to label voxels according to Brodmann areas. The SPM render function was used to plot our results on the cortex of an MNI brain, and MRICron was used to create multi-slice views of the t-score maps for each contrast of interest.


ERP-informed fMRI analysis

For ERP-informed fMRI analysis, a first-level model with one regressor was constructed for the onset of all change trials (blind/localise/sense), with single-trial ERP values included as a parametric regressor. The LP ERP in response to the change display was chosen a-priori for this analysis, as significant differences have previously been identified between awareness conditions within this late parietal potential (Fernandez-Duque and Thornton, 2003; Busch et al., 2010; Scrivener et al., 2019). A second regressor was added for the onset of all no change trials. Motion parameters were also included as nuisance variables.

An additional (not pre-registered) ERP-informed-fMRI analysis was performed, using the visual P1 and N1 amplitudes in relation to the change display. While some results suggest that ERPs as early as the P1 and N1 reflect conscious awareness, it is debated whether this is case (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010; Förster et al., 2020). We therefore considered it valuable to check whether any regions of the brain exhibited BOLD responses that correlated with fluctuations in these early ERP responses across time and awareness conditions.


Behavioral Results

Accuracy for question 1, in which participants had to identify a change, had a mean of 54% (range). Accuracy for question 2, in which participants had to localise the change, had a mean of 72% (range). The mean difficulty level given to each participant ranged from 6 to 23 squares, with the maximum difficulty experienced by each participant ranging from 18 to 36. D’prime scores ranged from 0.940 to 2.30. One person had a negative criterion, meaning that they had a response bias toward false alarms. All other participants had positive criterion, indicating a conservative response strategy. D’prime scores were significantly different from 0 in a one-sampled t-test, indicating that participants could discriminate between change and no change trials,.

Mean difficulty correlated with mean location accuracy and d’prime, but not with mean detection accuracy. Maximum difficulty also correlated with mean location accuracy and d’prime, but not with mean detection accuracy.

The percentage of false alarm trials was lower than the percentage of sense trials, suggesting that sense trials occurred more often than participants made false alarms. Additionally, the percentage of false alarms was not significantly correlated with the percentage of sense trials.

Out of the 20 participants included in the analysis, 15 were slower to respond when they were blind to the change, and compared to no-change trials. Reaction times for blind trials were also significantly slower than no-change trials (s),. Therefore, despite being blind to the change, the presence of a change in the display increased reaction times, and particularly for trials where the participant was uncertain.

We found a significant effect of location of the changed item (outside/central) on awareness (blind/localise/sense), (2) = 26.68, p < 0.001, as participants were more likely to be blind to the change when it occurred on the outside of the display (blind outside: 911 trials, central: 619). There were also a greater number of sense trials for outside changes, suggesting that these changes may be harder to localise than central changes (sense outside: 290 trials, central: 220). The location had the least influence on localise trials (localise outside: 627, central: 619).

The hemisphere of the display in which the change occurred (left/right) had no significant effect on participant awareness (blind/localise/sense), (2) = 4.941, P = 0.085 (blind left: 781 trials, right: 749; localise left: 651, right: 607; sense left: 236, right 276). Additional behavioral analysis and results can be found in the.

There was a significant effect of colour change on awareness,. Colour change pairs with a significantly higher number of blind trials were: yellow/green, yellow/cyan, green/cyan, blue/cyan, and white/cyan. Colour change pairs with a significantly higher number of see trials were: magenta/red, cyan/red, blue/red, and white/red. Overall, colour changes including red were more likely to be detected, given the prevalence of colour pairings that included red in the see condition. In the other direction, colour changes including cyan were more likely to be missed, as there were more blind trials with cyan in the colour pairing.


EEG Results


P1 and N1

For P1 amplitudes, the main effect of awareness was not significant,. Display was also not significant,. The interaction between awareness and display was not significant,. (Blind first display, second; localise first, second; sense first, and second).

For the N1, the main effect of awareness was not significant,. Display was also not significant, nor was the interaction between awareness and display,. (Blind first display, second; localise first, second; sense first, and second).


N2pc

The main effect of hemisphere on N2pc amplitudes was not significant, nor was the main effect of awareness,. The interaction was not significant,.

As we had strong hypotheses about the presence of an N2pc for localise trials, we also ran corrected post-hoc pairwise comparisons across awareness levels. A significantly increased negativity across both hemispheres was found for localise trials compared to blind P = 0.038. Blind and sense were not significantly different, P = 0.259, nor were sense and localise, P = 0.862.


Visual awareness negativity

The main effect of awareness on the VAN was not significant. (Blind, localise, sense).


Late positivity

There was a main effect of awareness on LP amplitudes. In corrected post-hoc comparisons, localise trials had a significantly greater LP amplitude than blind, P = 0.024,. However, sense was not significantly different to blind, P = 0.130, or localise trials, P = 0.174,.


fMRI Results


Awareness

For the contrast localise >blind, increased BOLD activation was found in the bilateral occipital cortex (BA17/V1, BA18/V2, and hOC4v/V4), bilateral parietal cortex (BA40/PFt, BA3b, and BA2), left putamen (BA49), left fusiform gyrus (BA37), right insula (BA13), right pre-motor cortex (BA6, spanning middle frontal, superior frontal, and pre-central gyri), and (see for significant clusters and for additional values).

For the contrast sense >blind, increased activation was found in bilateral occipital cortex (BA17/V1, BA18/V2), left pre-motor cortex (BA6, spanning middle frontal, superior frontal, and pre-central gyri), superior medial gyrus (BA8), parietal cortex (BA40, BA7/hIP3), and left ACC (BA32), and (see for significant clusters and for additional values).

We also looked for any activation that was significantly greater in one contrast than the other (localise >blind versus. sense >blind). However, no significant activations remained after correction for multiple comparisons. No voxels survived for the following contrasts; localise >sense, sense >localise, blind >no change, sense >false alarm, or false alarm >sense.


Post-hoc conjunction analysis

Given that the contrasts localise versus blind and sense versus blind revealed similar networks of activation, we ran a conjunction analysis to determine which voxels were significantly activated in both contrasts (note that this analysis was not included in our pre-registration). To do this, we entered the two first-level contrasts for each participant into an ANOVA at the second-level (independence not assumed). We then ran a conjunction analysis across both contrasts to identify common voxels, using the conjunction null hypothesis as suggested in Nichols et al. (2005). Significant activation was identified in the visual cortex (BA18, BA19) and inferior parietal cortex (BA7, BA39).


Difficulty and certainty

The parametric regressor of participant certainty revealed significant activation in the right visual cortex (BA17/V1, BA18/V2) and right parietal cortex (BA40). The parametric regressor of task difficulty (the number of squares presented per trial) revealed significant activation in the left visual cortex (BA18, V2).


ERP-informed fMRI

No significant voxels were identified for the LP-informed fMRI analysis using either method for extracting the single-trial values. In addition, no significant voxels were identified using the visual P1 or N1 in relation to the change display.


Discussion

The main aim of this change blindness experiment was to distinguish between trials in which participants could both detect and localise a change in coloured square (localise), versus those in which they could only detect it (sense), or not detect it at all (blind), using combined EEG-fMRI. In the EEG data, the late parietal positivity ERP, localise trials were significantly higher in amplitude than blind trials as previously found (Scrivener et al., 2019), but sense trials were not distinguishable from those where participants were blind to the change. Similarly, no differences were found between sense and blind trials in the N2pc or VAN. It is not clear whether this is due to false positive findings in the previous study, the smaller signal to noise ratio in the combined EEG-fMRI data, or the relatively small sample size.

The fMRI results revealed significant differences in BOLD activation for both localise and sense trials when compared to blind, suggesting that they are separable to trials where participants were completely unaware of the change. These results suggest that the sense condition may be distinguishable from the traditional blind condition, meaning that subjects may have access to more information when they are able to sense a change. However, the contrast between localise and sense conditions revealed no significant activations, and a conjunction analysis revealed overlapping activation in visual and parietal regions. These two levels of awareness may therefore be associated with activation within a similar network, and the link between brain activity and behavioral differences remains unclear.


Behavioral

One explanation for the presence of a sense condition in change blindness is that it reflects a liberal response criteria, such that participants report seeing a change even though they were not certain that it occurred (Simons and Ambinder, 2005). In other words, they make a “false alarm” during change trials. If this is the case, then these trials may be similar in number to false alarm trials, where participants incorrectly report a change for identical displays where they could not have seen a change. We found that participants had fewer false alarms than sense trials, and the percentage of these trials across participants was not correlated. This suggests that sense trials may not be attributed to a liberal response criterion of the participants, as the tendency of participants to make a false alarm did not influence the number of times they could sense a change. However, this differs from previous results, where a significant correlation was found in the percentage of the two trial types (Scrivener et al., 2019). Further behavioral data may therefore be needed to confirm this relationship.

Previous studies have also reported that participants responded “no change” more quickly for no-change trials, compared to change trials (Williams and Simons, 2000; Mitroff et al., 2004). The participant’s response is the same in both trial types, but the presence of a change is different. This suggests that even when they fail to detect the change in a change trial, they take longer to respond. We therefore compared reaction times for no-change trials and blind trials. Out of the 20 participants, 15 were slower to respond when they were blind to the change, and compared to no-change trials. Reaction times for blind trials were also significantly slower than no-change trials, meaning that even when participants did not notice the change, its presence increased their reaction times. It is possible that in blind trials, some information may be available to the participant, leading to slower reaction times, but not enough for them to be confident to report the change.

The location of the square that changed in colour during the experiment had a significant influence on the likelihood that the change was detected; changes closer to the central fixation were detected at a higher frequency across participants than those further away. One explanation is that the participants were asked to fixate at the center of the screen, and therefore their overt attention was directed here during the trial. As attention has been found to correlate with change detection, this finding is not surprising (Rensink et al., 1997).

We also found a significant effect of colour on awareness, such that changes involving the colour red were more likely to be detected, and changes involving cyan were less likely to be detected. We hypothesize that the increased salience of red squares caused a pop-out effect during these trials, leading to increase detection of the change. In the opposite direction, the colour cyan was perhaps more similar to other colours, such as white, making it more difficult to detect changes. Due to the large number of colour changes we had to collapse over the change direction (including both from and to a colour), and also over localise and sense conditions. It would be interesting to establish whether the advantage for change detection provided by the presence of red would also provide an advantage for change localization. If the colour red does initiate a pop-out effect, then we would hypothesize an advantage for both identification and localization of the change (Ball and Busch, 2015). Future studies aiming to establish more control over change detection across trials may wish to consider this effect of colour during experiment design.

Throughout the behavioral analysis presented here, the mean across trials for each participant was used as a summary statistic for further analysis. This is a relatively simple method for analysis of reaction time and accuracy data, and may not always be the most appropriate. For example, Rousselet and Wilcox (2020) outline the potential problems arising from using summary statistics, such as the mean and median, when comparing skewed distributions. Other possible approaches include hierarchical shift functions (Rouder et al., 2005; Wilcox and Erceg-Hurn, 2012), designed to overcome problems caused by asymmetric distributions, and linear mixed models (Lo and Andrews, 2015; Frömer et al., 2018). Using the mean to summarize complex behavior, such as reaction times, has its limitations and other statistics or methodologies may sometimes be more appropriate.


EEG

For the late parietal positivity ERP, localise trials were significantly higher in amplitude than blind trials. Other studies have also reported increased LP amplitudes for detected versus undetected changes (Fernandez-Duque and Thornton, 2003; Busch et al., 2010), which has been suggested to reflect conscious awareness of changes (Railo et al., 2011), and participant confidence (Eimer and Mazza, 2005). However, sense trials were not distinguishable from trials where participants were blind to the change. This contradicts our own results from a previous study where all three awareness conditions were distinguishable within the LP (Scrivener et al., 2019). There is therefore increasing evidence that the LP varies reliably between detected versus undetected changes, but whether it can be detected during sense trials is unclear. Note that the presence of a significant LP for localise, but not for sense, should not be used as evidence that the two are different as the post-hoc comparison was not statistically significant.

For the N2pc results, it should be emphasized that the main effect of hemisphere was not significant. Therefore, the post-hoc comparison in amplitude between localise and blind trials does not reflect the traditional asymmetry of the N2pc component, with a greater negativity in the contralateral hemisphere. It can only be concluded that there was an increased negativity for localise trials across both hemispheres, and may be better interpreted as an N2 component. This is a common finding, and in a review of the ERP correlates of visual awareness (Koivisto and Revonsuo, 2010) the majority of change blindness paper reported enhanced negativity in the N1–N2 range for detected changes (with the exception of Fernandez-Duque et al., 2003 and Niedeggen et al., 2001).

In a previous EEG study, we did find a significant N2pc for both localise and sense conditions, including a significant main effect of hemisphere (Scrivener et al., 2019). We concluded that the presence of an N2pc for both awareness conditions indicated a shift in attention toward the hemisphere of the change (Luck and Ford, 1998), but that this shift in attention was not sufficient to facilitate correct localization in sense trials. In this experiment, we failed to find any evidence for this shift in either awareness condition, as characterized by the N2pc.

We found no statistically significant effects of awareness in the P1, N1, or VAN ERP analysis, similar to our previous results (Scrivener et al., 2019). In a recent review of the ERPs associated with visual awareness (Förster et al., 2020), the authors concluded that early P1 and N1 peaks are unlikely to be the earliest signature of visual awareness, and no longer discuss these peaks as possible candidates. This is due to increasing evidence against their association with conscious detection, which our EEG and ERP-informed fMRI findings cannot dispute. However, they argue that the VAN is the most likely candidate for a marker of conscious detection, and our results are contrary to several previous findings. One possible explanation is the difference in experimental paradigm. In many cases, awareness is modulated by the perceptual difficulty of the stimuli, for example by the contrast. However, the stimuli in a change blindness paradigm remain at the same contrast across all trials, and difficulty is instead modulated by the number of distractors. Another suggestion from our previous work (Scrivener et al., 2019) is that the VAN requires both the location and identity of an object to be stored, such that it is available for conscious report. As our participants were not able to identify the location of the change in the sense condition, this may explain the lack of significant VAN ERP.


fMRI


Awareness

One aim of this experiment was to improve our knowledge of the neurological basis of the sense condition with the addition of fMRI results. We found largely overlapping activation for both localise and sense conditions when contrasted with trials where participants were blind to the change in coloured square. Both awareness conditions had significantly greater activation in the early visual cortex (B18, V2), the left supramarginal gyrus in the inferior parietal lobe (BA40), and the left pre-motor cortex (BA6).

The posterior parietal cortex and early visual cortex are commonly implicated as storage sites for the contents of visual working memory (Todd and Marois, 2005; Edin et al., 2009; D’Esposito and Postle, 2015), and previous fMRI studies of change detection also found activations in these areas (Beck et al., 2001; Huettel et al., 2001; Pessoa and Ungerleider, 2004). Using MVPA, Christophel et al. (2012) identified stimuli-specific information contained in both early visual and posterior parietal areas (around the intraparietal sulcus), further implicating these regions as storage sites for visual representations. The activation of these visual and parietal regions in both localise and sense conditions suggests the presence of visual representations of the stimuli for both levels of awareness. This supports the hypothesis that change blindness may arise from a failure to compare two displays or images, rather than a failure to encode the visual information (Hollingworth et al., 2001; Simons et al., 2005). Therefore, the inability of participants to localise the change during sense trials may not be explained by a lack of parietal representation, as activity in the dorsal stream (BA18 and BA40) was greater than during blind trials.

Activations found only in the localise contrast (but not for sense) were located in the primary sensory cortex (BA2, BA3b), putamen (BA49), and insula (BA13). This forms a wider network of activation than the sense versus blind contrast, including mid-brain structures. The insula and putamen are both hypothesized to act as hubs in key brain networks relating to cognitive control, and their activation specific to localise trials may indicate their role in facilitating full awareness of the change. More specifically, the insula forms an integrative hub between attention and salience networks (Eckert et al., 2009; Menon and Uddin, 2010), balancing external attentional cues with internal performance monitoring (Uddin et al., 2017). In contrast, the putamen is suggested to be a central component of a frontal-subcortical network (including the superior parietal and premotor cortex) related to cognitive control (van Belle et al., 2014), and has anatomical connections with rostral parietal areas (Jarbo and Verstynen, 2015). Further, patients with putamen lesions show symptoms of left-sided neglect (Karnath and Rorden, 2012), which is often thought of as a disorder of attention. Overall, the pattern of findings indicates both anatomical and functional links between the putamen/insula and parietal cortex, which may explain their increased activation during localise trials. However, it should be noted that our fMRI sequence parameters were not specifically designed for accurate recording of mid-brain structures, which may influence the reliability of these results (Eapen et al., 2011).

Activation in the ACC was found in the sense versus blind contrast. The ACC is commonly linked to functional networks underlying attention (Ungerleider and Leslie, 2000), and more specifically in boosting attention toward task-relevant stimuli (Orr and Weissman, 2009; Kim et al., 2016). Further, Mitchell and Cusack (2008) found ACC activation that correlated with estimates of the number of items stored by each participant during a working memory task. If this activation reflects increased attention toward the changed stimuli, then it would be expected to occur in both awareness conditions, as attention facilitates change detection (Rensink et al., 1997). However, ACC activation was not found in the localise condition, and therefore may not be necessary for full awareness of the change.

A more fitting explanation of the ACC activation specific to the sense condition is that it reflects error processing during the task. This is because sense trials contained a response error, where participants incorrectly localised the change. Using combined EEG-fMRI, ACC activation has been linked to error processing and is correlated with the error-related negativity in EEG (Debener, 2005; Iannaccone et al., 2015). Activity in this area could therefore relate to the incorrect responses of the participants during sense trials. However, it should be noted that activation in the ACC is found for a wide range of tasks and the specificity of this activation is debated (Dehaene, 2018). It could be argued that blind trials also contain a response error, as the participant failed to report a change that did occur. This should therefore also activate the ACC, if ACC activation reflects error monitoring (and that this error monitoring need not be conscious). Compared to blind trials, sense trials contained activation in visual (BA18) and parietal (BA40) areas, and the participant correctly reported the change. However, it is also possible that the ACC activation relates to the participant’s awareness of their own failure to localise the change, which is not relevant to blind trials where the participant can be very confident that no change occurred.

In relation to theories of visual consciousness, our results could be interpreted in support for the “partial awareness hypothesis” given the distinction in fMRI between blind and sense trials. Although participants were aware of the change during sense trials, their inability to provide further information suggests a less detailed representation of the visual display. Further, localise trials were associated with similar activity to sense in visual and parietal areas, perhaps reflecting activity relating to the “all-or-nothing” ignition of change detection. However, the additional activation related to localise trials may characterize an improved representation that facilitated correct localization. This hypothesis is speculative, and clarity is needed on the distinction between localise and sense conditions. For example, with future work using MVPA it would be possible to determine if the pattern of information stored within the brain is similar between these two levels of awareness. This would provide more information regarding the nature of stored representations during the task, and identify regions where these representations differ. Given the behavioral and phenomenological differences between localise and sense trials, it is reasonable to expect that somewhere in the brain should contain differing representations for these two levels of awareness, and therefore be driving the variation in participant response.


Difficulty and certainty

Using participant certainty at each trial as a parametric regressor, we found significant activations in the right visual cortex (BA18, V2), and bilateral supramarginal gyrus (BA40). These regions were also found to increase with awareness of the change (localise and sense trials), possibly due to the relationship between awareness and certainty. Specifically, when participants were aware of the change and could localise it correctly, they were likely to report higher certainty in their responses.

The parametric regressor of task difficulty (the number of squares presented per trial) revealed significant activation in the visual cortex (BA18, V2). This finding likely reflects the greater visual stimulation associated with a more complex visual array. In previous literature, parietal activity has also been correlated with set size and the number of objects stored in visual working memory (Mitchell and Cusack, 2008). Activity also predicts individual differences in working memory capacity (Vogel and Machizawa, 2004). We failed to find this effect, which may be explained by the variation in set sizes that were presented across participants. Instead of presenting a number of blocks with a number of difficulty levels, the difficulty was modulated in real time depending on participant performance. Also, the change in response may not be linear in our case; during easy trials, the response may scale linearly with the number of trials, until the maximum capacity of the participant is reached. Past this point, the number of items may exceed the capacity, and therefore fail to be represented or modulate the brain activation in these regions.


ERP-informed fMRI

Our pre-registered analysis method of LP-informed fMRI revealed no significant results. The additional exploratory P1 and N1-informed fMRI was also not significant. We therefore failed to identify voxels with activation that significantly co-varied with fluctuations in the EEG. It is acknowledged that EEG-BOLD couplings are weak, as they measure the effects remaining after the mean evoked BOLD responses are explained (Liu et al., 2016). However, previous combined EEG-fMRI experiments have managed to identify correlates of EEG using ERP-informed fMRI (Debener, 2005; Eimer and Mazza, 2005), even if at liberal correction thresholds.

One possible reason for the failure to find significant ERP-informed BOLD effects is the reduced signal to noise in EEG signals recorded inside the MRI environment. A second possibility is the method that we used to quantify single-trial ERPs. There is no single method for ERP-informed fMRI analysis, and we therefore chose to run two separate analysis pipelines in case of disparaging results. In the first, we used raw values from the EEG time series. This method is susceptible to noise artifacts, and any trials in which the noise signal is greater than the neurological signal of interest will reduce the chance of observing an effect across conditions. Given the increased number of artifacts in EEG-fMRI data, and the absence of perfect artifact removal routines, it is possible that the signal to noise ratio was too small in the raw single-trial ERP values.

In the second method, we used ICA to identify components matching our ERP of interest, with the hypothesis that noise signals would have a reduced contribution to the single-trial values extracted from this component (Debener, 2005; Wirsich et al., 2014). However, this method also produced null results in ERP-informed fMRI analysis. A downside to this method is that its success is dependent on (i) the algorithm accurately separating ICs, and (ii) the correct selection of the components containing the ERP of interest. Other possible processing steps used in ERP-informed fMRI include linear classifiers (Goldman et al., 2009; Walz et al., 2015), autoregressive models (Nguyen et al., 2014), and spatial laplacian filters (Liu et al., 2016), to name only a few. However, it is not within the scope of our pre-registered analysis to adjust the pre-processing or analysis steps any further.


Conclusion

Overall, one of the main aims of this experiment was to establish if the sense condition is separable from other awareness conditions in neural signals, as measured using EEG and fMRI. While the phenomenological experience of sensing differs from full awareness, it remains unclear whether this arises from a distinct state of neural activation, or whether these trials can be explained by explicit behavioral mechanisms such as participant response errors or lack of confidence. The strongest evidence presented here is the difference in fMRI activation for blind trials compared to sense trials. Across our sample, there was a greater spread of activation within areas such as the early visual cortex and inferior parietal sulcus when participants suspected a change, compared to when they missed it completely. This suggests that sense trials were measurably different to blind trials, and that participants did have access to more information regarding the change.

However, the contrast between sense and localise trials, where participants had full awareness, revealed no significant differences in activation. Additionally, the conjunction analysis revealed an overlapping occipitoparietal network of activation for these two levels of awareness. This suggests common activity related to the awareness of the change itself. In line with the “partial awareness hypothesis,” it may be that a degraded representation of the visual display within these regions contributed to failed localization during sense trials.

While we attempted to distinguish between true sense trials and localise trials with an error using participant certainty, the number of sense certain responses was low. This meant that dividing the awareness conditions into certain/uncertain for EEG or fMRI analysis was not feasible. Future experiments could focus on obtaining higher trial numbers, which would hopefully facilitate this analysis. However, the very nature of the sense condition means that participants are unlikely to be “certain” during many of the trials. One way around this would be to include a response option for participants to indicate if they think that they made a response error, although this would only identify trials where the participants were aware of their mistake.

Several previous studies investigating change detection and partial awareness have used eye-tracking data to establish that fixations can occur close to the location of a change, even in the absence of full awareness (O’Regan et al., 2000; Caplovitz et al., 2008; Galpin et al., 2008). Given that we found an effect of change location on the likelihood of detection, it would also have been beneficial to measure participants’ eye movements during the experiment, especially to investigate fixations during sense trials. Due to the complexity of combined EEG-fMRI and the already time-consuming set up, we did not add eye-tracking to this experiment. However, it would be an interesting avenue for future research.

In summary, our data suggests that the phenomenological experience of sensing a change is associated with increased activity in visual, parietal, and anterior circulate cortices, when compared to change blind trials. Given this increased activation including areas that are commonly implicated as the storage sites of visual working memory, we argue that sensing may not be caused by a lack of representation of the visual display. Instead, sensing may reflect unsuccessful comparison of the two displays (Hollingworth et al., 2001; Simons et al., 2005), or a degraded representation that prevents accurate localization of the change in space.


Contributor Information

Catriona L Scrivener, Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Earley, Reading, RG6 6BZ, UK; MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 7EF, UK.

Asad Malik, Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Earley, Reading, RG6 6BZ, UK.

Michael Lindner, Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Earley, Reading, RG6 6BZ, UK.

Etienne B Roesch, Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Earley, Reading, RG6 6BZ, UK.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

The raw data, pre-processed data, and analysis scripts can be found on the Open Science Framework:https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/W6BH3.


Minimal physicalism as a scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness

Chris Fields, James F Glazebrook, Michael Levin — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8327199, CC BY 4.0.

Theories of consciousness and cognition that assume a neural substrate automatically regard phylogenetically basal, nonneural systems as nonconscious and noncognitive. Here, we advance a scale-free characterization of consciousness and cognition that regards basal systems, including synthetic constructs, as not only informative about the structure and function of experience in more complex systems but also as offering distinct advantages for experimental manipulation. Our “minimal physicalist” approach makes no assumptions beyond those of quantum information theory, and hence is applicable from the molecular scale upwards. We show that standard concepts including integrated information, state broadcasting via small-world networks, and hierarchical Bayesian inference emerge naturally in this setting, and that common phenomena including stigmergic memory, perceptual coarse-graining, and attention switching follow directly from the thermodynamic requirements of classical computation. We show that the self-representation that lies at the heart of human autonoetic awareness can be traced as far back as, and serves the same basic functions as, the stress response in bacteria and other basal systems.

Keywords: active inference, aneural systems, basal cognition, classical computation, integrated information, memory, quantum computation, self-representation, state broadcasting


Introduction

The starting point for sciences of consciousness and cognition has traditionally been human consciousness and cognition. The Cartesian presumption against nonhuman consciousness and cognition remained strong enough, even just two decades ago, that prominent researchers found it necessary to argue in print that nonhuman animals and even human infants experienced perception and interoception and engaged in intentional actions (e.g. Panksepp 2005; Trevarthen 2010; Rochat 2012). Those days are thankfully behind us. While researchers in comparative cognition may debate the levels of complexity, compositionality, or stimulus-independence an information-processing system must have to be regarded as “cognitive” (see Bayne et al. 2019 for a recent snapshot), big-brained creatures that learn readily and display flexible behavior in complex environments are now regularly regarded as cognitive systems that are aware of both their environments and their own bodily states, even if they are birds (e.g. Güntürkün and Bugnyar 2016; Nieder et al. 2020) or cephalopods (e.g. Mather 2019; Schnell et al. 2020). To insist that such creatures altogether lack phenomenal consciousness, that they are incapable of experiencing pain and likewise experience nothing whatsoever while hunting, improvising tools, or engaging in mating displays as a doctrinaire Cartesian presumably would, seems by current standards chauvinistic or even perverse.

Characterizing birds and cephalopods, and for that matter other mammals and even other people, as phenomenally conscious begs, of course, the philosophical questions of what phenomenal consciousness is ontologically, and of how it relates to observable structures, functions or behaviors. These questions constitute the “hard problem” (HP) of consciousness (Chalmers 1996; cf. Dietrich and Hardcastle 2005; Dietrich et al. 2021). We agree with Klein and Barron (2020) that the HP is not a problem to be solved, but rather a set of intuitions to be overcome. The questions of interest regarding birds, cephalopods, other mammals, and other people are not, as far as we are concerned, whether or why, in some philosophical sense, they are capable of experience, but rather: (1) what any particular organism or other system of interest is aware of, and (2) how its awareness drives its cognition. Our interest here is not, moreover, in what any particular experience is like for any given system, but in whether it is like something or other; to employ a common example, it is not the particular characters of red or green qualia that are of interest (see e.g. Hacker 2002 for an argument that no such particular characters even exist), but whether some difference between what we, as 3rd party observers, call “red” and “green” is experienced by the system of interest, and whether this difference has some effect on what the system does. Hence we regard consciousness as a (potential) property that a system may have, independently of any details about what it experiences: it is enough, in our view, that it experiences something, that some experience occurs (see Lamme 2018 for a discussion of some of the subtleties that this “binary” view elides). We will use the terms “awareness” and “consciousness” to mean the capacity for or capability of having phenomenal experiences, however basic or minimally structured, and will focus exclusively in what follows on the “what” and “how” questions above.

A well-established literature extends the concepts of consciousness—the capability of having phenomenal experiences, however basic or minimally structured—and cognition to phylogenetically basal systems, including free-living or facultatively communal unicells, whether pro- or eukaryotic (Maturana and Varela 1980; Pattee 1982; Stewart 1996; di Primio et al. 2000; Lyon 2015; Baluška and Levin 2016; Baluška and Reber, Levin, Fields and Levin 2020a; Lyon 2020; Baluška et al. 2021), plants (Calvo and Kiejzer 2009; Gagliano and Grimonprez 2015; Baluška et al. 2018; Debono and Souza 2019; Calvo et al. 2020), and aneural or lower (than mammals, birds, or cephalopods) complexity neural metazoa, particularly flatworms (Shomrat and Levin 2013; Inoue et al. 2015; Levin 2020) and insects (Menzel 2012; Perry et al. 2017; Pfeffer and Wolf 2020). Like the extension of these concepts from humans to nonhuman mammals and then to big-brained nonmammals, this extension to more basal organisms was initially motivated by observations of communication, learning, and behavioral flexibility, and by functional similarities between the mechanisms supporting information processing and learning in basal systems and in more complex systems such as mammals. Both molecular and bioelectric mechanisms of cellular information processing, memory, communication, and error correction are, in particular, evolutionarily ancient and conserved across phylogeny (Fields and Levin 2018, 2020b; Fields et al. 2020; Levin 2020). Neither the specialization of some epithelial cells for communication, i.e. as neurons (Nickel 2010; Arendt et al. 2015; Burkhardt and Sprecher 2017) nor the gradual elaboration of brains (Holland et al. 2013; Liebeskind et al. 2017) introduce fundamentally novel molecular or bioelectric mechanisms. Hence while claims of specific kinds of experience, e.g. pain in plants (Draguhn et al. 2020), are controversial, there is no evident biological discontinuity below which organisms can clearly be viewed as completely unaware of their bodily states or their environments, i.e. as utterly lacking phenomenal consciousness. Nor is it obvious that supra-organismal systems utterly lack phenomenal consciousness (Friedman and Søvik 2021). Indeed, the criteria for “having experiences” may be as vague, general, and extensible to non-Terrestrial or even artificial systems as plausible criteria for “life” are (e.g. Bartlett and Wong 2020; but see also Mariscal and Doolittle 2020 for an argument that such “definitionism” is scientifically pointless).

With the development of more sophisticated, biologically motivated theoretical models of consciousness and cognition, the functional similarities between information processing in basal and in more elaborated systems have become even more evident. It is now well-known that signal transduction and gene regulatory networks in single cells share the scale-free, small-world topology (Agrawal 2002; Barabási and Oltvai 2004; Schlitt and Brazma 2007) found ubiquitously in nervous systems (Sporns and Honey 2006; Hagmann et al. 2008; Shanahan 2012; Sporns 2013) and even in social and technological networks (Watts 1999; Barabási 2016; but see Broido and Clauset 2019 for evidence that some biological and social networks are small-world but not strictly scale-free). Networks with high fan-in/high fan-out “bow-tie” topology (Wang et al. 2016; Niss et al. 2020), in particular, implement state-broadcasting functions analogous, at the cellular level, to the broadcasting functions of long-distance connections between network hubs in global neuronal workspace (GNW) models (Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Baars and Franklin 2003; Wallace 2005; Baars et al. 2013; Dehaene et al. 2014; Mashour et al. 2020). Signal transduction and gene regulatory networks are, even when they contain bow-tie nodes, characterized by multiple, typically cross-modulating feedback loops that enable both behavioral plasticity and learning (e.g. Brun-Usan et al. 2020); hence they have positive integrated information Φ and render their minimal containing systems conscious by the criteria of Integrated Information Theory (IIT; Tononi 2008; Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi and Koch 2015). As the locus of molecular, thermodynamic, and bioelectric exchange with the environment, the cell membrane implements a Markov Blanket (MB) that renders its interior conditionally independent of its exterior (Pearl 1988; Clark 2017); this allows the cell to be described as a Bayesian active inference system (Friston, see also Cooke 2020 for a variation on this approach). The utility of this Bayesian approach has been demonstrated in simulation models of cell–cell communication driving morphoghenesis (Friston et al. 2015; Kuchling et al. 2020). These cross-scale similarities motivate a hypothesis that consciousness and cognition are scale-free phenomena that characterize all living systems (Levin, Fields and Levin 2020a).

If consciousness and cognition are scale-free phenomena, we can expect them to be supported by common, scalable mechanisms that can be investigated in whatever systems permit the most straightforward theoretical and experimental approaches. Phylogenetically basal organisms, in vitro preparations, and synthetic constructs (e.g. Kriegman et al. 2020) provide obvious advantages of manipulability and environmental control. Studies of basal systems are, moreover, especially effective in overcoming the intuitions that give rise to the HP, as they allow the mechanisms via which single cells and relatively simple multicellular organisms navigate their environments—mechanisms that they share with most of our cells, and with us as organisms—to be investigated in detail. A theoretical framework suitable for such systems should be scalable, provide a full suite of formal capabilities, and make as few assumptions as possible. It should, in particular, make no scale-dependent architectural assumptions.

Here, we provide a straightforward construction of fundamental, scale-free features of consciousness and cognition within a generic description of system-environment information exchange as bipartite physical interaction (Fields and Glazebrook 2020a; Fields and Marcianò 2020a,b). We term this description “minimal physicalism” (MP) as it makes no assumptions about classical computational architecture, in particular, no assumptions about network architecture (Broido and Clauset 2019), and no physical assumptions beyond those of quantum information theory (Nielsen and Chuang 2000 provide a standard introduction). At the level of molecular interactions at the Angstrom, femtosecond (Å, fs) scale of molecular dynamics calculations (Zwier and Chong 2010; Vlachakis et al. 2014), biological systems are quantum systems, and biological information processing is quantum computation: cellular energy budgets of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes fall orders of magnitude short of the power required to maintain classical states of just protein conformation and localization at this scale (Fields and Levin 2021), despite the massive consumption of ATP by big-brained eukaryotes such as humans (Ueno et al. 2005; Okuno et al. 2011). Hence cellular information processing cannot be entirely, or even primarily classical, the experimental difficulties (Cao et al. 2020) of unambiguously observing quantum coherence in biological systems notwithstanding.

As we show below, the thermodynamic requirements of classical computation by quantum systems have profound consequences for cellular, and hence for organismal, awareness and information processing. In general, basing MP on the physical assumptions of quantum information theory has significant empirical consequences that extend far beyond a mere rejection of dualism. These include:

MP is completely scale-free, applying in the same form to interactions between molecules, cells, tissues, organisms, social groups, or ecosystems and their respective environments. Hence it predicts common mechanisms that can be probed empirically at any scale. It makes no assumptions about the structure or dynamics of the environment, at any scale, beyond its being a physical system.

MP requires every property of either itself or the environment to which an organism or other living system is differentially sensitive to be specified explicitly in terms of the information processing employed by the organism or system to detect and respond to that property. This includes properties often taken for granted, such as the existence of external objects or their embedding in three-dimensional (3d) space, and applies regardless of whether detection and/or response is recorded to memory or “reportable” via any specific assay.

MP treats information and energy as formally equivalent, explicitly enforces conservation of energy, and hence requires the thermodynamics of classical computation (Landauer 1961; Bennett 1982) to be represented explicitly. It requires the thermodynamic cost of memory to be accounted for at every scale, and automatically enforces a metabolism—cognition tradeoff.

Information processing functions, including writing to or reading from a classical memory, are specified in this framework using the scale- and implementation-independent, category-theoretic language of Barwise-Seligman (“token” – “type”) classifiers and their associated infomorphisms (Barwise and Seligman 1997; see Fields and Glazebrook 2019a for review and example applications). This generic specification language has been previously employed to characterize human object and event categorization using both abstraction and mereological hierarchies (Fields and Glazebrook 2019b) and human problem solving within a GNW context (Fields and Glazebrook 2020b). As it requires the reference frames employed to give internal, e.g. perceptual or motor, representations operational meaning to be explicitly specified, this language requires all semantic hypotheses to be formulated in explicit, experimentally accessible molecular or network-theoretic terms.

We outline the main components of MP in the next section, keeping formalism to the minimum and relying on previous work for details. We show that MBs and a notion of actionable or “meaningful” (Bateson 1972; Roederer 2005) information emerge naturally in an MP framework. We then discuss predictions of MP regarding perception, memory, and attention, providing examples primarily from basal systems for illustration. We show that requirements for coarse-graining and attention switching emerge naturally from the thermodynamics of classical computation. We then consider resource-usage monitoring as a requirement of homeo- or allostasis, and the emergence of a “self” as a representation of resource usage.


Components of MP: Information Exchange, Markov Blankets, and Reference Frames


Physical interaction is information exchange

The re-interpretation of physics as an information theory was initiated by Feynman (1982) and Wheeler (1990), but has its roots in the work of Boltzmann (1995), who first recognized that reducing uncertainty has an energetic cost, and Shannon (1948), who linked uncertainty reduction with communication. It is deeply rooted in Wheeler’s (1983) idea of “observer-participancy”: that information can only be obtained by intervention, i.e. by actively posing a question (see Mermin 2018; Müller 2020 for recent, somewhat philosophical discussions). Physics is intrinsically quantum due to the quantization of obtainable information into bits: answers to yes/no questions (Wheeler 1983). The basic formalism of this quantum information theory is surprisingly simple, and rests on only the two assumptions specified below.

The simplest physical interactions are bipartite: some physical, i.e. quantum system A (conventionally called “Alice”) interacts with some other system B (“Bob”). We can therefore write:

or more explicitly, in terms of Hilbert spaces:

where U is the joint system (“universe”) comprising A and B and ⊗ is the Hilbert-space tensor product. The dynamics of the joint system is completely described by a Hamiltonian operator:

where HA and HB are the internal or “self” interactions of A and B respectively and HAB is their mutual interaction. The operator HU has units of energy and drives state change via the Schrödinger equation:

where i = √-1, ℏ = h/2π, h is Planck’s constant, and |U(t)> is the time-dependent state of U. The mutual interaction HAB describes Alice’s observations of and actions on Bob, and Bob’s observations of and actions on Alice. The internal interactions HA and HB describe Alice’s and Bob’s internal state changes.

The above descriptions are completely generic and characterize any bipartite interaction between quantum systems (Nielsen and Chuang 2000). As a quantum system is simply a collection of physical degrees of freedom, this formalism makes, in particular, no assumptions about implementation: it applies equally to matter (e.g. molecules) or fields (e.g. electromagnetic fields as in McFadden 2020). We now impose two assumptions:

We require the dimension of the joint system U to be finite. This limits both A and B to finite energy resources and HAB to finite resolution.

We require the joint state |U> = |AB> to be separable, i.e. |U> = |AB> = |A>|B>. Equivalently, A and B are not entangled. In this case, HAB specifies the entire dependence of A on B and vice-versa, and we can talk about the state |A> of A and the state |B> of B independently.

With these two assumptions, the interaction HAB can be written, without loss of generality, as:

where k = A or B, i = 1 … N for finite N, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, Tk is k’s temperature, βk ≥ ln 2 is an inverse measure of k’s average thermodynamic efficiency that depends on the internal dynamics Hk, the αki(t) are N real functions such that, for any macroscopic time interval Δt:

and the Mki are N Hermitian operators with binary eigenvalues +1 or -1 that can be regarded as “questions to Nature” with yes/no answers [Wheeler 1983; see Fields and Glazebrook 2020a; Fields and Marcianò, 2020b for details on and and their interpretation]. The requirement that βk ≥ ln 2 in enforces Landauer’s principle of the finite per-bit cost of irreversibly acquiring an observational outcome (Landauer 1961; Bennett 1982), while imposes a normalization condition, equivalent to the requirement that the probability of acquiring some outcome whenever a measurement is made is unity. As we discuss below, and are the only physical requirements needed to describe both free-energy exchange and information transfer in a generic bipartite interaction between finite quantum systems in a separable joint state. We can write in English as:

This is the conceptual heart of quantum information theory. It, like and, applies at any scale.


Interactions induce MBs

The complete generality of allows us to view any interaction between two finite quantum systems in a separable joint state as classical communication: the exchange of some finite number of finite bit strings during any finite time interval Δt. The interaction can be depicted as in: A and B can be regarded as alternately preparing, and then measuring N independent, mutually noninteracting quantum bits (qubits), e.g. photon polarizations, electron spins, or any other systems having two clearly distinguishable values of a manipulable state variable. In each cycle of interaction, A prepares the N qubits and then B measures them; the roles then reverse, with B preparing and A measuring. As N becomes large, the interaction may appear “continuous” at macroscopic scales, but remains constrained to finite resolution, and hence a finite bit rate, by the restriction to finite thermodynamic resources built into. The time required for A to prepare, and then B to measure (or vice versa), the N systems can be regarded as the smallest possible “macroscopic” and hence effectively classical time interval (see Fields and Glazebrook 2020 for an explicit construction of this interval). The collection of all N qubits encodes, at each such minimal macroscopic time, one N-bit string specifying one of the 2N eigenvalues of HAB; each cycle of interaction is thus an exchange of N-bit strings, each one encoding an (in general different) eigenvalue.

The encoding of eigenvalues by qubits shown in satisfies the requirements for a holographic encoding: the only information about B available to A, or vice versa, is the sequence of eigenvalues of HAB encoded by the qubit array. Hence we can consider the qubit array as a holographic screen separating A from B. Any such holographic screen defines a classical communication channel, i.e. a channel via which A and B exchange finite bit strings (Fields and Marcianò 2020b; Fields et al. 2021). As no other system interferes with this channel, it is free of classical noise. However, it is characterized by quantum noise whenever A and B employ different reference frames (e.g. different z-axis reference frames in the case of qubits implemented by electron spins) to prepare and measure the qubits. The effect of such quantum noise is to impose a classical probability distribution Prob(measured|prepared) on each qubit; i.e. its observable effect is indistinguishable from classical noise.

If we now consider the internal (quantum) states |A> and |> and the states |> of the qubit array forming the holographic screen between them, we see that |A> affects |B> only via its effect on |>, i.e. only via the action of HAB. This is, as noted above, a consequence of separability: separability implies conditional independence. Conditional independence of |A> from |B> and vice-versa is, however, also the MB condition (Pearl 1988; Friston 2013; Clark 2017); hence we can view as an MB. Indeed, the generalization of the holographic principle stated by and illustrated in implies that any holographic screen defines a classical information channel that functions as an MB, and vice versa (Fields and Marcianò 2020a; Fields et al. 2021).

As discussed in Friston (2013), MBs are ubiquitous features of living systems, and are indeed what distinguish living systems from their environments (see also Friston et al. 2015; Kuchling et al. 2020; Fields and Levin 2020c). Indeed MBs are ubiquitous features of all physical systems with ergodic behavior (Friston 2019). The MB concept is scale-free; Rubin et al. (2020) show, e.g. that it applies to Earth’s biosphere as a whole. The cell membrane, and in eukaryotic cells, organelle membranes, implement the most fundamental biological MBs. The blanket states of these MBs comprise the states of the embedded receptors, channels, and other exchange molecules, together with the permeability, elasticity, and other properties of the membrane itself. The existence of the MB enables the cell to have a well-defined state, conditionally independent of its environment; hence it enables homeostatic/allostatic processes. The information about the environment available to the cell, and vice-versa, is limited to that encoded by the state of the MB. A similarly strong conditional independence result has been obtained via evolutionary game theory by considering generic systems subjected to competition for environmental resources (Hoffman et al. 2015; Prakash et al. 2020a,b).

The central importance to the cell of the MB implemented by its membrane strongly suggests that enclosure by a membrane was the fundamental requirement for the origin of life (Friston 2013; Fields and Levin 2020c). What was enclosed by the MB/membrane of the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) represents the initial condition and oldest memory (Fields and Levin 2018) of all subsequent life. Viewed from an informational perspective, the state space of LUCA’s membrane-enclosed cytoplasm, including its nucleic-acid, protein, and small-molecule components, specifies the initial information about the environment available prior to membrane enclosure and hence physical separation from the environment. While the cytoplasmic conditions of later cells have diverged from these initial conditions, sometimes radically, they remain a fixed constraint with which all paths of divergence must be consistent. Here, the classical meaning of “separation” from the environment as the presence of a physical barrier accords with its quantum-theoretic meaning of state distinguishability. We can, indeed, see the former as implied by the latter.


Actionable information is encoded by quantum reference frames

The information that transits the cell membrane, and is thereby encoded on the MB implemented by the membrane, is actionable or meaningful to the cell: it “makes a difference” to what the cell does (Bateson 1972; Roederer 2005). When the cell’s interaction with its environment is represented as measurement as in or, what renders the information meaningful becomes clear: meaning requires measurement with respect to some reference frame (Fields and Levin 2020a; Fields et al. 2021). Viewed abstractly, a reference frame is a value, or more generally a vector, from which deviation is detectable. Consider, e.g. measuring the states of an array of qubits implemented by electron spins. Determining whether the spin of a qubit is up (+1) or down (–1) requires a reference frame that defines a particular z-axis, a vector in 3d space. Such a vector can be defined by, e.g. a Stern-Gerlach apparatus oriented in some particular way relative to the Earth’s gravitational field. Only the presence of a common reference frame allows multiple measurements to be compared, and hence makes any differences between them meaningful. Sequential measurements of electron spin with respect to a randomly varying z-axis merely yield noise.

While in classical physics a reference frame is an abstraction that can be completely described to arbitrary precision, this is not true in quantum theory (Bartlett et al. 2007). Quantum theory requires all reference frames to be implemented by physical systems, but forbids the description of any physical system to arbitrary precision. Hence quantum reference frames (QRFs) cannot be completely described to arbitrary precision; they encode, in virtue of their physical implementation, “unspeakable” (Bell 1987) or “nonfungible” (Bartlett et al. 2007) information. This is even true of meter sticks, the lengths of which become uncertain as the energies required to probe them become comparable to the binding energies of nucleii. It is much more obviously true of complex systems such as Stern-Gerlach apparatus or atomic clocks.

The intrinsically nonclassical nature of QRFs has some surprising consequences. Transferring a QRF from one observer to another requires transferring the physical implementation; transferring a finite bit string is provably insufficient (see Bartlett et al. 2007 for proof and examples). Any such transfer requires, moreover, that sender and receiver already share a QRF sufficient to identify the transferred system (Fields and Marcianò 2019). We can, therefore, without loss of generality regard all QRFs available to any observer, including any organism, as physically implemented by the dynamical structure of that system, i.e. by its internal Hamiltonian. All QRFs are, therefore, quantum informational processes, i.e. quantum computations, implemented by physical systems that act as observers. The computations that implement QRFs are, as we will see below, key to understanding both what organisms are aware of and how their awareness drives their cognition. They are, therefore, the central components of any scientific theory of consciousness and cognition that is mathematically consistent with quantum information theory.

The Che-Y system employed by bacterial chemotaxis, e.g. in Escherichia coli, provides a simple example of a biological QRF. If the concentration [Che-Y-P] of phosphorylated Che-Y is high, the flagellar motor spins counter-clockwise and the bacterium swims in a straight line; if [Che-Y-P] is low, the motor spins clockwise and the bacterium tumbles (Wadhams and Armitage 2004; Micali and Endres 2016). “High” and “low” concentrations of phosphorylated Che-Y are defined with respect to some default concentration ratio [Che-Y-P]/[Che-Y] of phosphorylated to unphosphorylated forms, which in turn depends on the balance of relevant kinases and phosphorylases. The default ratio [Che-Y-P]/[Che-Y] is the QRF for the Che-Y system; it fixes a particular value at which behavior switches from straight-line swimming to tumbling. Whether the measured [Che-Y-P]/[Che-Y] at any given time is above or below this fixed value effectively determines whether a stimulus is approached, i.e. is considered “good” by E. coli or avoided, i.e. considered “bad.”

In any electrically excitable cell, the resting membrane potential V0mem is a QRF for polarization: values of Vmem > V0mem are depolarized, while values of Vmem < V0mem are hyperpolarized. The setting of this reference frame is critical to cell behavior in both neurons and nonneural cells. In the planarian Dugesia japonica, altering V0mem of blastomere cells by blocking cell communication via gap junctions during regeneration can effect a homeotic transformation of the posterior from tail morphology to head morphology, including a complete functional brain (Oviedo et al. 2010; Durant et al. 2017). In both neurons and electrically excitable plant cells, blocking gap junctions via anesthetics induces cell quiescence (Baluška et al. 2016; Gremiaux et al. 2014; see also Kelz and Mashour 2019 for a general discussion of anesthetic effects across phylogeny).

The quantum theory of complex, macroscopic systems is generally intractable; hence investigating the general properties of biological QRFs requires an abstract, scale-free specification language. The category-theoretic formalism of Channel Theory, developed by Barwise and Seligman (1997) to describe networks of communicating information processors, provides a suitably general language for specifying the functions of QRFs without any specific assumptions about their implementation. The information processing elements in this representation are logical constraints termed “classifiers” that can be thought of as quantum logic gates; they are connected by “infomorphisms” that preserve the imposed constraints (numerous application examples, mainly in computer science, are reviewed in Fields and Glazebrook 2019a). Combinations of these elements are able to implement “models” in the sense of good-regulator theory (Conant and Ashby 1970). Suitable networks of classifiers and their connecting infomorphisms, e.g. provide a generalized representation of artificial neural networks (ANNs) and support standard learning algorithms such as back-propagation. Networks satisfying the commutativity requirements that define “cones” and “cocones” (“limits” and “colimits,” respectively, when these are defined) in category theory (Goguen 1991) provide a natural representation of both abstraction and mereological hierarchies (Fields and Glazebrook 2019b) and of expectation-driven, hierarchical problem solving, e.g. hierarchical Bayesian inference and active inference (Fields and Glazebrook 2020b,c). Commutativity within a cone—cocone structure, in particular, enforces Bayesian coherence on inferences made by the structure; failures of commutativity indicate “quantum” context switches (Fields and Glazebrook 2020c).


Predictions of MP: Awareness, Memory, and Attention


Awareness of X requires a QRF for X

Theories of consciousness typically assume that the agent of interest is embedded in an environment that has observer-independent features and contains observer-independent objects. The visual system, e.g., is often described as using “inverse optics” to compute an “observer-independent” 3d layout from a 2d image (e.g. Pizlo 2001). Assuming observer-independent, ontological “givens” both restricts the agent of interest to some subset of our (typically assumed a priori) ontology and risks under-predicting the agent’s computational requirements. It makes von Uexküll’s (1957) question of defining the organism’s umwelt, and hence Nagel’s (1974) “what is it like?” question harder, and makes the Cartesian response that most organisms are aware of nothing, and hence have no umwelt easier.

Quantum theory itself forces MP to reject environmental “givens” on purely formal grounds. The Hilbert space B in and internal Hamiltonian HB in can be decomposed in any arbitrary way without affecting the interaction HAB at all (Fields); hence HAB can communicate no information to A about any such decompositions. This is the case for any bipartite interaction, and hence any interaction described by, regardless of the physical makeup of the interacting components. It is the conditional independence between the inside and outside of an MB expressed in more fundamental physical terms.

By rejecting any a priori ontology for the environment, MP requires any perceived ontology to be fully supported by the information-processing capabilities of the perceiver. In particular, any perceived feature of, or perceived object embedded in, the environment B of any agent of interest A must be rendered both detectable and meaningful by a QRF implemented by A. This is illustrated in cartoon form in: detecting an environmental feature (a box) with a property (a color) requires a QRF for “box-ness” and a specific detector for the color. The box-detecting QRF encodes those properties (reference state observables) that boxes must have to qualify as boxes; hence it picks out boxes, and only boxes, against the general background of B. Informally, the QRF can be thought of as an attractor in an “interpretation space” associated with the system implementing the QRF. The property detector determines the value of some “pointer” observable that characterizes all systems that qualify as boxes; here, the box’s color. In quantum-theoretic language, identifying a bounded system (feature or object) having some specific property “decoheres” B relative to A (see Fields and Glazebrook 2020a; Fields and Marcianò 2020b for formal analysis). It is important to emphasize that A’s perceptual and cognitive capabilities have no effect on the physical state |B>, and in particular do not render it separable. The features or objects that A detects in B are strictly relative to A, not “objective” in any observer-independent sense (again see Mermin 2018; Müller 2020 for discussion from a purely quantum-theoretic perspective).

Specifying “objects of awareness” entirely in terms of QRFs, with no claims of observer-independent ontology, renders typical formulations of the “combination problem” ill-posed. Combination is well-defined for QRFs: two QRFs implemented by a single system can be combined if, but only if, all of the operators (i.e. the Barwise-Seligman infomorphisms) involved mutually commute (Fields and Glazebrook 2020c). This is the “combination” implemented by standard binding processes, e.g. feature or feature-motion binding during object categorization (Fields and Glazebrook 2019b). “Combination” of QRFs implemented by different systems is, on the hand, strictly undefined: the measurement operators implemented by different systems act on different environments, each of which by definition contains (at least partially) the other system. Hence what Chalmers (2017) calls the “quality” and “structure” combination problems cannot be coherently posed in MP. What Chalmers calls the “subject” combination problem is solved, for living systems, by their environments; systems that cannot maintain homeostasis/allostasis do not survive, and are unlikely to assemble at all. Systems that do survive are described by MP if they satisfy and, but they may implement only trivial QRFs. Hence we agree with the deflationary position advocated by Montero (2017), though for more technical reasons.

This universal requirement that awareness be supported by QRFs yields somewhat counter-intuitive predictions of minimality in basal organisms:

Prediction 1: Moving in 3d space does not require a QRF for 3d space, and hence does not require experiencing 3d space. E. coli chemotaxis provides an example. E. coli has a 1d spatial QRF: its body axis, with (mainly) anterior chemoreceptors and (mainly) posterior flagella. Directed “approach” motion is along this axis; undirected “tumbling” re-orients this axis randomly in the 3d “lab” frame of an observer equipped with a 3d QRF. E. coli has no known means of computing the relative angle between its pre- and post-tumbling linear motion, i.e. it has no known 3d QRF; hence tumbling appears to implement a 3d random walk (Wadhams and Armitage 2004). Colonial microbes living in planar mats, on the other hand, can potentially use differential cell–cell or cell–substrate interactions to distinguish left from right (Jauffred et al. 2017) and hence establish a 2d QRF; microbes inhabiting multi-species 3d mats with vertical division of labor may have 3d QRFs (Prieto-Barajas et al. 2018). Differentiated cells of multicellular eukaryotes clearly employ such QRFs (e.g. Bajpai et al. 2021); interestingly, multi-axis morphology correlates with the presence of neurons and appears to be directly instructed by neural signaling (Fields et al. 2020). How the representation of 3d space in migrating cells is coupled to the representations of cell- or extra-cellular surface characteristics, bioelectric and morphogen gradients, and other morphogenetic signals remains a central question in developmental biology (Grossberg 1978; Pezzulo and Levin 2015).

Prediction 2: Successful interaction with an object does not require a QRF that identifies that object, and hence does not require experiencing that object. E. coli mating provides an example: the mating pilus extends randomly in 3d space, and is tipped by an adhesin of unknown specificity (Cabezón et al. 2015). Commonplace lateral gene transfer (LGT) between members of distant microbial lineages (Robbins et al. 2016) suggests that mating without mate detection is routine in the microbial world; viral-mediated gene transfer and direct uptake of nucleic acids from the environment provide even more extreme examples. Communal microbes such as Myxococcus xanthus that differentiate kin from nonkin even below the species level, however, appear to have sophisticated, though yet uncharacterized, QRFs for other organisms (Muñoz-Dorado et al. 2016; Thiery and Kaimer 2020). Fungi that engage in differential anastomosis appear similarly equipped (de la Providencia et al. 2005). Cell-type identification QRFs appear to be implemented in part bioelectrically in multi-species microbial mats (Humphries et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020); the ubiquitous use of bioelectric signaling in fungi suggests that this may be the case for fungal cell-type QRFs as well.

Prediction 3: Successful causation does not require a mechanism for detecting causation, and hence does not require experiencing causation. Hunting swarms of M. xanthus kill and eat other microbes, but appear to have separate, noncommunicating detection systems for prey species and edible prey components (Thiery and Kaimer 2020). Hence they have no way of causally associating the killing of prey with the subsequent availability of edible prey components.

These can be summarized by the following, which recognizes the key role of memory in enabling the experiences of space, objects, and causation:

Prediction 4: Having a memory does not require a QRF for linear time, and hence does not require experiencing time or retrievable memory. All organisms have genomes that record their phylogenetic history, but they have no mechanism for reading their previous genomic states. The genome does not, therefore, function as an internal QRF for linear time. This applies, in particular, to us, although we can employ the genomes of other organisms as external linear time QRFs (Kumar 2005).

If this last prediction is correct, microbes and perhaps other organisms lacking linear time QRFs may live in a “continuous present” characterized mainly by chemoreception (“taste”) and stress (see below). Their sensory capabilities may change radically via LGT or other mechanisms, but they cannot “notice” such changes.

Biological memories exist at multiple scales (Fields and Levin 2018). Characterizing the scales at which memories are encoded, and the QRFs that enable them, emerges as a central task for any theory of consciousness that assumes MP. Bioenergetic studies may provide a content-independent means of approaching these questions, as discussed below.


Experienced memories are encoded on boundaries

Actions by an organism on its environment are, in the language of, preparations of an MB state |> that its environment observes. A swimming bacterium, e.g. prepares a new environmental state by expending energy to change its location. In Friston’s (2013) terms, this is active inference: acting on the environment to change its state alters, in consequence, the subsequent environmental states observed by the active system.

Actions are, by definition, thermodynamically irreversible: they transfer classical information, via, from the organism to its environment. Transfers of classical information across boundaries such as are, moreover, the only thermodynamically irreversible events in MP. As with the requirement for QRFs to enable awareness, this is a consequence of MP’s quantum theoretic foundation. The state |A> is not, in general, assumed to be separable; hence its Schrödinger evolution is time-reversible and incurs no energetic cost (Bennett 1982). Information can only be retrievable at some later time if it is irreversibly and hence classically encoded. Hence retrievable memories can, in MP, only be encoded on boundaries such as. As experiencing a memory as such requires an ability to compare two experiences—either two memories or a memory and a current state—it requires retrieval. Any experienced memory must, therefore, be both encoded on, and retrievable via an appropriate QRF from.

This fundamental thermodynamic constraint has immediate consequences for biological architecture and for the structure of QRFs for linear time:

Prediction 5: All retrievable biological memories are stigmergic. Beginning with bacteria (Gloag et al. 2015), biological systems ubiquitously employ stigmergic memories (Heylighen 2016). This is not a surprising observation to be explained, but rather an empirical confirmation in MP. The idea that the experiencing mind “extends” (Clark 1998) into the environment via stigmergic memory is a direct consequence of quantum theory.

The stigmergic nature of memory can be reconciled with the experience of memory as an internal, private phenomenon only if the agent A is compartmentalized by internalizing part of to provide an internal boundary on which classical information can be encoded. This internal boundary imposes a separability condition |A> = |A1>|A2> as shown in; A1 becomes part of the “environment” of A2 and vice-versa. The interaction between A1 and A2 can be written in the form of; hence information flow across is bidirectional classical communication between the components A1 and A2. If we view A2 as implementing perception and A1 as implementing action, this communication, together with the environment’s response, forms a closed loop. Hence we have:

Prediction 6: Internal awareness requires internal boundaries. Any system A capable of experiencing internal memories, in particular, has a separable internal state and positive integrated information Φ. Internal memories are built into all systems that qualify as conscious in IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014, see especially Fig. 19) and are the basis for such systems having Φ > 0. Here, we see this as a consequence of quantum information theory.

As discussed above in connection with MBs, this prediction links separability in its quantum-theoretic sense of state distinguishability with separability in its classical sense of separation by a boundary: the internal boundary functions as an MB that encodes classical information and imposes conditional independence. It provides for a general expectation that living systems will be compartmentalized by internal boundaries on which classical information can be encoded. Because MBs limit, as well as enabling, information transfer, it also predicts a systematic inability to determine the source of a memory. In particular:

Prediction 7: Compartmentalized systems cannot determine the sources of their encoded memories. Systems can be expected to behave as if memories they encode reflect their own past experience, whether they do or not. Studies of memory transplantation (Pietsch and Schneider 1969) and false-memory induction (Ramirez et al. 2013) in nonhuman animals provide mechanistic support for this prediction (see Levin 2020 for additional examples and discussion), as does the psychology (Henkel and Carbuto 2008) and neuroscience (Straube 2012) of false-memory induction in humans.

Organisms record memories as messages to their future selves. Neither the mechanism that recorded a memory, the internal or environmental events that induced recording, nor the context in which the recording occurred are discoverable, however, when the memory is later retrieved. This fundamental uncertainty about the sources of memories can be seen as a consequence of a more general uncertainty about whether QRFs are shared, either by distinct observers at a single time, or by a single observer across time. This question of QRF sharing is provably finite Turing undecidable (Fields et al. 2021).

The compartmentalization in can be arbitrarily generalized:

Prediction 8: Experiential complexity scales with internal compartmentalization. Evolution “discovered” the benefits of internal compartmentalization ca. 3.5 billion years ago with the development of microbial biofilms exhibiting differential exposure to the open environment and division of metabolic labor (Stal 2012). The organelles of eukaryotic cells, including internal membrane complexes such as the Golgi apparatus, are canonical intracellular compartments. Multicellularity is the most common form of macroscopic compartmentalization, but is not required; examples such as Acetabularia (Schweiger 1969), glass sponges (Leys 2016), and syncitial fungi (Roper et al. 2015) all illustrate complex functional compartmentalization within single giant cells.

This prediction is clearly in line with the expectations of IIT, and again provides a physical basis for these expectations.

Cellular compartments and intercellular boundaries are, from a biological perspective, dynamic structures that must be preserved through metabolic activity. This requirement can be stated abstractly:

Prediction 9: Memory stability scales with the frequency of read/write cycles. The stabilization of classical bit values by repeated cycles of preparation followed by observation is called the “quantum Zeno effect” (Misra and Sudarshan 1977); the probability that the state remains stable is proportional to the frequency of observations. Hence memory decay—“forgetting”—is predicted whenever memories are not routinely accessed. This is broadly observed across phylogeny. Repair systems for nucleic acids and degradation systems for proteins provide molecular-scale examples.

Rewriting classical information costs free energy, i.e. requires metabolism as discussed below. This requirement for read/write cycles suggests that compartmentalization plays a key role in the implementation of linear time QRFs:

Prediction 10: Any ordered sequence of separate memories together with a comparison function can serve as a linear time QRF. Trajectories, including looming, are the simplest linear time QRFs; in the limit, they may support only sequential comparisons and hence only distinguish “then” from “now.” Insects are capable of at least short-sequence linear time perception; spiders are capable of longer sequence perception (Japyassú and Laland 2017). Merely executing a fixed action pattern does not require experiencing linear time, although it clearly requires an internal clock. Molecular cell-cycle clocks are as old as life, and circadian clocks are as old as cyanobacteria (Johnson 2004); both are highly conserved across phylogeny (Doherty and Kay 2010). Possessing a molecular clock does not, by itself, enable time perception.

Prediction 11: Time and object/feature identity are duals. Perceiving a trajectory requires perceiving an object or feature executing that trajectory; conversely, motion perception is the basis of object identity (Fields 2011). Whether insects or relatively low-complexity vertebrates are aware of objects as such or only features of their environments is unclear; bees at least have robust spatial memory and feature perception, and may recognize objects as such (Chittka 2017), while fish appear to recognize conspecifics as distinct objects (Sovrano et al. 2018). Spiders are capable of robust object perception and object-directed planning (Japyassú and Laland 2017), as are cephalopods (Mather 2019), birds and mammals.

Environmental objects and features that are experienced as having stable identities are, to close the circle, the canonical bearers of stigmergic memories. Without perceptible object identity, time is not perceptible and hence memories cannot be recognized as such. Only an organism capable of experiencing linear time and objects or features with stable identities can experience memories. Such an organism inhabits a rich and meaningful umwelt, whether its ontology easily relates to our own or not.


The free-energy costs of irreversibility induce coarse-graining and attention-switching

With the understanding of QRFs developed above, we can return to the question of bioenergetics, see why living systems can have only limited awareness, cognitive capacity, and memory, and understand the tradeoffs between these.

The dynamics described by explicitly conserves energy: βATA = βBTB. Hence some fraction of the bits transferred from B to A must be “burned” by A to supply the free energy required to irreversibly encode classical information (Fields and Glazebrook 2020a). These free-energy supplying bits are not available as input to any QRF (Fields et al. 2021). As no QRF can read the values encoded by these bits, their values are irrelevant and indeed “invisible” to A. They can, therefore, be considered random for A, i.e. to constitute environmental “noise” or in thermodynamic terms, a heat bath. As noted above, however, the source of this noise is quantum, not classical; there is no third system injecting noise into the bipartite A-B interaction (see Fields et al. 2021, for further discussion).

A central question of biology is: how can organisms maintain their phenomenal complexity with such small free energy budgets? The answer is alluded to above: quantum computational complexity, implemented by unitary Schrödinger evolution, is energetically free (Bennett 1982). Classical, i.e. observable or experienceable computational complexity is expensive, ln2 kBT per bit. Hence we have:

Prediction 12: Organisms only require the energy needed to maintain their classical states. As seen above, these are encoded on either exterior or intercompartmental boundaries. An organism’s energy budget must, therefore, supply the free energy needed to maintain, via Zeno-effect read/write cycles, the classical states of their compartment boundaries. Nonboundary states can remain quantum, evolve unitarily, and consume no free energy. Only the inputs and outputs of these quantum computations are classically encoded, all on boundaries.

Clearly not all boundary-localized processes are classical; electron-transport processes operating in the THz range could consume a cell’s entire energy budget if fully classical. The technical difficulty of observing nonclassical behavior in such systems (e.g. Cao et al. 2020) is not surprising. All of our observational outcomes are classical by definition; observing quantum coherence requires observing expectation violations in probability distributions over recorded classical events (e.g. Mermin 1993). This suggests that an indirect approach to quantitating nonclassicality in biological systems is required. From the above considerations, stable memories provide a quantitative lower limit on classicality, while the cellular energy budget provides an upper limit. Determining what states a cell or organism commits free energy to maintain, i.e. what the set points for homeostasis/allostasis are, may be the best approach to estimating the net classicality of biologically encoded information.

Biological encodings of classical information have lower limits of 1–2 nm in radius, e.g. the size of a typical protein active site (Liang et al. 1998) or a gap-junction channel (Sosinsky and Nicholson 2005), and about 200 fs in time, e.g. the response time of rhodopsin to photons (Wang et al. 1994). Cellular response times, even for bioelectric responses, are orders of magnitude larger and involve much larger areas. This loss in resolution is a consequence of bioenergetics:

Prediction 13: Actionable classical encodings are coarse-grained. Actionability requires irreversible encoding as in. The free energy to support this encoding must come from, and hence must consume some of the bits encoded on as fuel. The information encoded by these bits is irreversibly lost to A; hence all of A’s irreversible encodings are coarse-grained.

Any system A that encodes information irreversibly is, therefore, faced with a choice that its computational architecture must resolve: the tradeoff between preserving information via memory and losing information due to coarse-graining. A flexible solution to this tradeoff is to devote memory resources to only some input information, i.e. to the results computed by only some QRFs, allowing these selected results to be recorded at higher resolution while recording others either at low resolution or not at all. Hence we have:

Prediction 14: Living systems in complex, dynamic environments will evolve attention-switching systems. Attention has long been associated with consciousness (Engel and Singer 2001) and attention allocation is one of the main functions of competition for access to the workspace in GNW models (Dehaene and Naccache 2001), whether formulated in terms of the “rich club” (Sporns 2013), “connective core” (Shanahan 2012) or “giant component” (Wallace 2005) of the larger network. Indeed the “self” has been described as a working model of attention allocation (Graziano and Webb 2014; see also below). In humans, attention can drive entirely illusory object perception (Ongchoco and Scholl 2019), consistent with active-inference models of Bayesian-precision allocation (Kanai et al. 2015). Here, we see a requirement for active attention as a consequence of the thermodynamic requirements of classically encoding information.

The approach/avoid switching in simple chemotactic systems such as E. coli provides a basal model of the switch between active exploration and expectation revision at the heart of active inference theory (Friston 2010). Such models suggest that every such switch is governed by a reference value set by some QRF. Dorsal/ventral attention system switching in humans (Vossel et al. 2014) is sensitive to a vast array of expectations, the reference values of which are unknown and in at least some cases subject to considerable individual variation. Salience assignments driving both exploratory and reactive behavior are, in particular, highly dependent on individual experience, strongly coupled to the core self-representation and the reward system, and subject to variation in both prosocial and pathological directions (Uddin 2015). Much of ethology can be viewed as the comparative study of salience. Understanding how QRFs that regulate salience vary across phylogeny will be a major step toward answering the “what is it like?” question in a systematic way.


Resource Usage, Interoception, and the Self

The considerations above reinforce the obvious point that acquiring and monitoring the usage of free-energy resources is one of the core functions of any living system. A second core function, equally necessary for the maintenance of homeostasis/allostasis, is damage control. Within the MP framework, these core functions are supported by a QRF that encodes the set points that serve as the overall homeostatic attractor. This QRF defines the “self” in MP.

Prediction 15: The “self” comprises three core monitoring functions, for free-energy availability, physiological status, and organismal integrity, and three core response functions, free-energy acquisition, physiological damage control, and defense against parasites and other invaders. These will be found in every organism. Indeed they are found even in E. coli, which has inducible metabolite acquisition and digestion systems (Jacob and Monod 1961), the generalized “heat shock” stress response system (Burdon 1986), and restriction enzymes that detect and destroy foreign, e.g. viral DNA (Horiuchi and Zinder 1972). All of these responses act to restore an overall homeostatic setpoint, i.e. an expected nonequilibrium state; hence they can all be viewed as acting to minimize environmental variational free energy or Bayesian expectation violation (Friston 2010).

Specialized molecular pathways for the core functions of the self are supplemented by specialized intercellular communication pathways in multicellular organisms and by inter-individual communication pathways in social organisms, e.g. eusocial insects (Robinson 1992) or humans. Networks of neurons support feeding, locomotion (a primary stress response) and defense already in Cnidarians (Bosch et al. 2017) and at least feeding and locomotion in Ctenophores (Moroz 2015); these functions become far more complex in bilaterian animals, particularly in active animals including arthropods, cephalopods, and vertebrates (Liebeskind et al. 2017), and form the basis of “core consciousness” in Damasio’s (2000) framework.

Considerable evidence now indicates that interoception in humans, and so presumably in mammals generally, employs a predictive coding mechanism (Hohwy 2013; Seth 2013) and is strongly coupled to the core self-representation and the salience network via the insula—cingulate—orbitofrontal loop (Craig 2010; Uddin 2015; Seth and Tsakiris 2018). This predictive coding system manages homeostasis/allostasis across the scale hierarchy from cells to organ systems (Corcoran and Hohwy 2019) and couples interoception to exteroception and proprioception (Barrett and Simmons 2015; Seth 2013; Barrett 2017; Seth and Tsakiris 2018). Intriguingly, emotional and stress responses, core components of the self, are highly sensitive to gut microbiome activity in humans and other animals (Vuong et al. 2017; Sarkar et al. 2018). As all multicellular eukaryotes have obligate symbiotic microbiomes (hence are “holobionts”; Gilbert 2014), one can expect that microbial contributions to stress detection and response are universal.

The thermodynamic costs of memory impose a particular restriction on the self, which predatory eukaryotic unicells such as Paramecium, animals, and quite possibly plants solve by weighting the less-certain future lower in resource priority than the (by default assumed to be) more-certain past:

Prediction 16: Organisms bias their “cognitive light cones” (Levin 2019), their representational and computational boundaries of concern or goal-directedness, toward the past. Memory, in other words, takes precedence over planning. The extent to which food caching, cooperative hunt organization, and other future-directed activities by nonhuman animals provides evidence of deliberative, explicit planning remains controversial (Bayne et al. 2019), with some arguing that all forms of imaginative “mental time travel” are human-specific (Suddendorf and Corballis 2007). It is, however, clear that explicit planning requires classically encoded representations of future events and so competes for resources with memory. As planning also requires explicit memory, it cannot win this competition.

The free-energy costs of mental time travel in either direction constrain it to an “off-line” activity when organisms are faced with rapid change that requires high-resolution perception and action. Such constraints also apply to the real-time representational costs of the self. Hence we can predict:

Prediction 17: Increasing real-time response requirements will disrupt encoding of the self-representation. This is observed in humans in “flow” states (Csikszentmihályi 1990), in highly automated, expertise-dependent activities including most social interaction (Bargh and Ferguson 2000; Bargh et al. 2012), and in experimental manipulations in which fatigue in various modalities affects cognitive performance (Massar et al. 2018). The extent to which nonhuman animals are able to apply “theory of mind” reasoning to themselves, and hence maintain a metacognitive self-representation, remains controversial (Martin and Santos 2016).

The picture that emerges from these energetic considerations is of a self-representation with critical functions and deep evolutionary roots (Levin 2020), but with only limited and transient exposure to awareness via explicit encoding. This is broadly consistent with the constructive views of the self outlined by Blackmore (2002), Chater (2018), Graziano and Webb (2014) among others.


Context Change Drives Evolution, Development, and Learning

Psychology in the 20th century was consumed with controversies pitting evolution (“Nature”) against learning (“Nurture”), with developmental processes straddling the conceptual gap in between. The development of robust machine learning algorithms, the advent of evo–devo (Müller 2007; Carroll 2008), the recognition that evolution itself can be viewed as a learning process (Power et al. 2015; Watson and Szathmáry 2016; Kouvaris et al. 2017), and in particular, the scale-free applicability of active inference models (Friston 2013; Friston et al. 2015; Fields and Levin 2020b,c; Kuchling et al. 2020) have done much to deconstruct these distinctions. As a scale-free approach in which any lineage can also be considered an individual (Fields and Levin 2020c), MP treats evolution, development, and learning as instances of a common mechanism. It distinguishes two nonoverlapping cases: gradual alterations in the relative contributions of QRFs or components of QRFs to outcomes, and saltatory changes in QRFs themselves.

Prediction 18: Context changes drive QRF changes. Here, we define context changes strictly: For a fixed set {oi} of observables, a context change x → y has occurred if the probability distributions Prob(oi|x) and Prob (oi|y) are well defined but the joint distribution Prob(oi|x∨y) is not (Kochen and Specker 1967; Dzhafarov et al. 2017). Here, “observables” are by definition classifiers, each of whose components consist of event/(condition, context)/valuation triples (Fields and Glazebrook 2020c; Fields et al. 2021). Under these conditions, QRF change in response to context change is required to maintain Bayesian coherence (Fields and Glazebrook 2020c).

Context switches are hard to measure, as doing so requires predicting what “background” variables are relevant in fact to how an event is processed, a prediction problem that is in general intractable (Dietrich and Fields 2020). Saltatory changes in event representations, e.g. canonical “Aha!” moments (Kounios and Beeman 2015), may reflect context-driven QRF changes. Basal systems may provide uniquely manipulable windows into such processes: e.g. Pezzulo et al. (2020) have recently suggested that bioelectrically driven saltatory morphological changes in planaria may employ the same underlying mechanism as saltatory changes in episodic memories in mammals.


Conclusions

Quantum theory has had a long and somewhat disreputable association, dating back at least to von Neumann (1932), with the science of consciousness. A dominant concern, beginning at least with Wigner (1961) and extending through Penrose (1989), Schwartz et al. (2005), and Hameroff and Penrose (2014) to Georgiev (2020) has been to employ quantum theory to establish an ontological foundation for a science of consciousness. Our interest here has not been ontological, but rather empirical: to derive as much as possible from the simple assumption that consciousness involves information exchange subject to the constraints of quantum information theory. We have shown that the MP framework that follows from this assumption allows many of the key features of consciousness to be understood as simple, scale-independent consequences of thermodynamics.

In direct contrast with strict Cartesianism, MP holds that we can better understand our own awareness by understanding the awareness of our more basal cousins. Our homeostatic/allostatic drives and the mechanisms that satisfy them are phylogenetically continuous with those of prokaryotic unicells including E. coli. Our concepts and categories are implemented by QRFs playing the same roles, and satisfying the same basic requirements, as the Che-Y system regulating bacterial chemotaxis. The tradeoffs that we implement, and adjust in real time, between perception, memory, and planning are tradeoffs that have been explored and adjusted in niche-specific ways by all organisms throughout evolutionary history. We can take advantage of these fundamental mechanistic similarities to design theoretical and experimental paradigms that reveal and assess scale-free properties of consciousness in both natural and engineered systems.


Comparing theories of consciousness: why it matters and how to do it

Simon Hviid Del Pin, Zuzanna Skóra, Kristian Sandberg, Morten Overgaard, Michał Wierzchoń — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8372971, CC BY 4.0.

The theoretical landscape of scientific studies of consciousness has flourished. Today, even multiple versions of the same theory are sometimes available. To advance the field, these theories should be directly compared to determine which are better at predicting and explaining empirical data. Systematic inquiries of this sort are seen in many subfields in cognitive psychology and neuroscience, e.g. in working memory. Nonetheless, when we surveyed publications on consciousness research, we found that most focused on a single theory. When ‘comparisons’ happened, they were often verbal and non-systematic. This fact in itself could be a contributing reason for the lack of convergence between theories in consciousness research. In this paper, we focus on how to compare theories of consciousness to ensure that the comparisons are meaningful, e.g. whether their predictions are parallel or contrasting. We evaluate how theories are typically compared in consciousness research and related subdisciplines in cognitive psychology and neuroscience, and we provide an example of our approach. We then examine the different reasons why direct comparisons between theories are rarely seen. One possible explanation is the unique nature of the consciousness phenomenon. We conclude that the field should embrace this uniqueness, and we set out the features that a theory of consciousness should account for.


Introduction

In recent decades, the field of scientific studies of consciousness has grown considerably. There have been regular international conferences on the topic, and more empirical results and theoretical works have been published than ever before. Notable contemporary scientific theories of consciousness include Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness (Rosenthal 2005; Brown et al. 2019), Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) (Dehaene and Changeux 2011), Integrated Information Theory (IIT) (Oizumi et al. 2014) and Recurrent Processing (RP)theory (Lamme and Roelfsema 2000). As a sign of the plurality of theories in the field, several aforementioned theories exist in multiple versions. An example of this is IIT which, like software, is named ‘IIT 3.0’ in its most recent formulation. Each theory mentioned here is, to some degree, backed by empirical evidence that aims to confirm its claims. Looking at the impressive number of publications based on this approach, consciousness research seems to be flourishing.

However, some critics claim (see, e.g. Irvine 2014) that the current state of consciousness research is not satisfactory. Irvine notes that even though consciousness researchers use scientific methods, these methods ‘(…) instead of being used to provide independent empirical evidence, and to structure progressive research programs (…) are often used in a post hoc way to support pre-theoretic assumptions, and so contribute to debates only in a superficial way’ (Irvine 2014, 105).

Given Irvine’s critique, one may thus wonder if the plurality of theories and results is actually helpful if the goal is more scientifically accurate descriptions of consciousness. In relation to this issue, Doerig et al. (2020) speculate whether the plethora of theories simply reflects a lack of rigour in how we relate theories to empirical results.

To demarcate science, Lakatos (1976) noted that a research programme may be on a path to become pseudoscience if it predicts nothing new or makes predictions that never come to pass. Is this a risk for consciousness studies and, if so, how can we mitigate it?

To address these described shortcomings, we offer a series of steps in this paper that can be taken by individual researchers today. They can potentially also be employed more broadly in the field in the future. The steps include formulating predictions and focusing on more than a single theory. To create an overview, we will first define an approach to comparing multiple theories formally. For comparisons of theories, we discuss some guidelines that we consider beneficial. We then examine whether and how current research papers compare theories in the consciousness field and determine if we can learn anything from an approach currently seen in working memory (WM) studies, which is another area of cognitive psychology. Finally, we consider if WM and consciousness studies have enough similarities that some solutions can be applied in our area.


Comparisons of multiple theories

The risk related to researchers focussing on just one theory was described by Chamberlin (1897) more than a century ago:

‘The moment one has offered an original explanation for a phenomenon which seems satisfactory, that moment affection for [one’s] intellectual child springs into existence, and as the explanation grows into a definite theory [one’s] parental affections cluster about [the] offspring and it grows more and more dear […] There springs up also unwittingly a pressing of the theory to make it fit the facts and a pressing of the facts to make them fit the theory’. (840)

It can indeed be reasonable to modify theories explicitly so that they fit new observations. However, we take Chamberlin’s assessment to be similar to Irvine’s previously mentioned concerns: a theory, once changed in a post-hoc manner, misleadingly risks stating that it has always predicted the observations at hand or that the observations at least do not pose any threats to the theory.

Chamberlin (1897) believed that the antidote to attachment to a single theory was to create multiple hypotheses. However, he noted that there are costs related to formulating and entertaining them. A formal approach coined stronginference (SI) was later proposed by John Platt (1964). SI can be viewed as the first approximation of a method that aims to operationalize a theory, test it and compare it to alternative views. The programme consists of four steps, which were slightly revised by Alger (2019):

Conceive of multiple alternative hypotheses to account for the phenomenon you are studying.

Devise crucial experiments to exclude one or more of the alternatives.

Carry out the experiments and interpret the data.

Recycle the procedure to develop subhypotheses and sequential hypotheses to refine the results with further testing (46).

Platt believed that this method is the most efficient way to achieve scientific progress. To illustrate this claim, he quotes a speech by Leo Szilard (central in both the Manhattan Project and the cloning of the first human cell) from a conference about how proteins are synthesized:

‘If you do stupid experiments, and finish one a year, it can take 50 years. But if you stop doing experiments for a little while and think how proteins can possibly be synthesized, there are only about 5 different ways, not 50! And it will take only a few experiments to distinguish these (Szilard 1958, as cited in Platt 1964, 348)’.

SI was thus thought to be an economical approach to formulating a theoretical position and sharpening researchers’ experimental designs. Platt even claimed that fields that often employ SI, such as molecular biology and high-energy physics, progress faster than fields that rarely use this programme. Platt mentions the molecular biology research of Francis Crick [who became a pioneer in investigating the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC)] as an example of a well-performed, logic-driven approach. Crick followed logic-based reasoning in which he systematically devised crucial tests to rule out alternatives step by step (Platt 1964).

Although never using these terms, Platt seems to prefer theory-driven rather than data-driven research approaches. In his view, equations are useful for making formal definitions. Still, he insisted that logic must come first: the most robust theories can be explained in terms of logic and only then formalized mathematically. However, Platt acknowledges that empirical work more often consists of collecting data that are later analysed and related to theories. Arguably, this approach is even more prevalent today with big data and similar data-driven methods. While such approaches have their merits, he generally sees them as a substitution of causation to correlation. In Platt’s view, data-driven approaches also risk reducing the researcher from a critical thinker to a person who simply collects data.


Critiques of strong inference

SI has since been critiqued. Some have questioned the historical veracity of Platt’s claims, by pointing out that even great scientists such as Newton also conducted more exploratory research (O’Donohue and Buchanan 2001). Exploratory phases may thus be more relevant than Platt initially acknowledged. In fact, there have been attempts to expand on SI with Strong Inference Plus (Jewett 2005), which adds additional steps: an exploratory phase in which hypotheses are generated and a pilot phase to investigate statistical power.

Another critique points to the Duhem–Quine thesis, which states that all falsifications are necessarily ambiguous and rely on background assumptions (O’Donohue and Buchanan 2001). Imagine this hypothesis: the boiling point of water is 100 degrees Celsius. Is the hypothesis disproved if someone observes water boiling at 90 degrees Celsius? Most would say ‘no’ and check the auxiliary conditions: how high above sea level was the person and how reliable is their thermometer? Even more fundamentally, how do thermometers relate to heat? According to this view, it is thus logically impossible to formulate a crucial experiment that directly falsifies a theory.

While relevant, these critiques seem mitigated once one sees SI as an important tool but not the only one. Chamberlin (1897) noted more than a century ago that it is rash to assume that any single method is the method in science. Considering the strengths and weaknesses of SI, we propose moving forward by formulating multiple competing hypotheses based on opposing theories. The goal of such an endeavour should not be to dismiss theories that do not get any support; the aim is to create clarity in the field by highlighting theories that make correct predictions and possibly offer areas of improvement for those that do not. In some ways, this endeavour can achieve benefits similar to adversarial collaborations in which two or more researchers with opposing theoretical views agree on an experimental paradigm that can satisfyingly distinguish their predictions.

An adversarial collaboration that shares similarities with SI was recently finalized in the field of WM (Cowan et al. 2020). In this paper, the contributors to this collaboration describe the advantages and pitfalls of this method. Even though the collaboration did not lead to any of the senior researchers abandoning their favourite theoretical views, in their opinion it markedly improved the accuracy and clarity of their theories (Cowan et al. 2020).

Having laid out a general framework for comparing theories, we examine whether the SI approach has been used in consciousness studies and how theory comparisons have generally been performed in the field, in the following sections.


Comparisons in consciousness research—a general picture

To illustrate how often SI or similar formal comparisons of multiple hypotheses are performed in consciousness research, we searched for articles mentioning arguably the two theories of consciousness that are currently most prevalent: IIT and GNW (Michel et al. 2018). We chose GNW and IIT as they are similar in scope and influence, even though they differ in multiple ways. GNW was developed by enriching a cognitive theory [Global Workspace (GW) theory—Baars and Franklin 2003] with neuro-computational models. These models lead to empirically testable predictions (Dehaene et al. 2011). On the other hand, IIT was developed based on phenomenological axioms. These axioms are claimed to lead to inferences about the physical properties of consciousness and testable predictions (Tononi 2008). Despite their different theoretical assumptions, starting points (phenomenological axioms vs. neuro-computational models), postulated NCC or level of formalization, it may turn out that these theories complement rather than compete against each other [as mentioned in Northoff and Lamme (2020) that we will describe in more detail later on]. Especially if given a chance to directly compare them on empirical grounds. For example, increased complexity should follow the activation of the GW at least to some extent. Thus, one may expect that multiple papers will aim to compare the two theories. This led us to wonder how often papers would mention both theories rather than one of them.

Over the last decade, there has been an impressive increase of scientific publications mentioning either theory, but less than 7% of publications mention both. At just above 7%, this rate was similar for 2020 alone. Note that this survey does not rule out papers that compared IIT or GNW to yet another theory. It also does not take into account whether a paper offers empirical theory comparison, simply mentions both theories in the context of data interpretation or discusses their assumptions on only a theoretical level. The low proportion is nevertheless striking as it includes mere mentions of these two theories. Therefore, the number of formal comparisons will necessarily be substantially lower. We surveyed the top 10% of the papers deemed most ‘relevant’ according to Google Scholar’s ranking that included both theories. We found that most of them did not compare these theories using multiple hypotheses. When ‘comparisons’ happened, they were often verbal, non-systematic and post hoc, rather than being based on explicit, testable hypotheses, as recommended by SI. A recent paper by Doerig et al. (2020, 2) reached a similar conclusion: ‘Currently, there are very few mutual comparisons between ToCs [Theories of consciousness]. Instead, authors build on their own ToCs, largely ignoring others’. Sadly, this fits Irvine’s characterization of the field that was mentioned in the introduction. Nevertheless, outside of the criteria used for the survey, we found a few positive examples where theories of consciousness were compared more rigorously.


Comparisons in consciousness research—examples

There are already papers in the field that aim to compare theories of consciousness. We describe them only briefly, focusing on their general approach to theory comparison. The first two examples represent comparisons, which rely on existing data. In contrast, the latter examples show systematic comparisons, some of which make predictions on novel data.

Boly et al. (2017) and Odegaard et al. (2017) both reviewed a similar set of evidence relating to the position of the neural correlate of consciousness. They reached opposite conclusions and thereby illustrated a crucial problem with data-driven approaches. A formal comparison of the predictions of either viewpoint before an investigation of the data might have alleviated this outcome. Fleming and Daw (2017) conducted such a formal comparison. They mathematically defined three models based on competing theoretical viewpoints. Next, they derived several predictions based on their preferred model, which they confirmed with previously published data. A benefit of such an approach is that whenever the models disagreed on empirical results, there was an opportunity to learn something rather than confirm or reject a single prediction. However, knowing the results in advance could have biased the formulation of their preferred theory.

The above shortcoming has been addressed by Maniscalco and Lau (2016), who first formulated mathematical models based on three theoretical views and then collected experimental data. Using statistical tests to evaluate the data against the models, they addressed an important point: many models would likely have performed better than a null model if they had been tested individually. Testing models against each is in the spirit of SI while still being data-driven. Similarly, King et al. (2016) attempted to formulate theories of consciousness mathematically and compare their predictions systematically. Interestingly, this method appears to follow the outline of SI, although they never refer to it by name.

Finally, we consider the approach by Northoff and Lamme (2020) close to the first steps of both SI and the approach we present in this paper. By systematically reviewing and comparing select theories in the field, they investigated if some theories are complementary rather than competitive. They considered a range of aspects, such as the major areas of interest, typical measures and proposed NCCs. In this comparison, they found that some theories may be compatible as they tackle different aspects of consciousness (e.g. state rather than content, stimulus-related or not). We consider this paper, and the approach itself, as a solid background, to propose empirical predictions and design experiments that could provide evidence in favour or against selected theories.

Based on the examples above, we see that there are attempts at more formal theory comparisons in the field of consciousness, whether this is consciousness defined broadly (King et al. 2016; Boly et al. 2017; Odegaard et al. 2017) or more narrowly (Maniscalco and Lau 2016; Fleming and Daw 2017). More recently, researchers introduced much more general comparisons, consisting of comparisons of multiple consciousness theories (Northoff and Lamme 2020) or proposing common ground to compare theories of interest (Doerig et al. 2020). We will lay out the approach we took in the next sections when comparing theories in line with SI. That is, a comparison of verbal theories that rely on performing a crucial test to distinguish between opposing predictions.


The logic and results from our comparison of theories

In a recently published paper (Del Pin et al. 2020), we tested two hypotheses based on the Partial Awareness Hypothesis (PAH) (Kouider et al. 2010) and RP. Concisely, the PAH states that participants experience complex scenes in a fragmented way, often unnoticed as cues can allow participants to reconstruct scenes. Specifically, the PAH extends GWT to account for graded (phenomenal) accessibility. Based on PAH, we assume that a presentation of a cue that does not contain the same amount of details would reduce performance. For example, if a part of a scene were a red car but only a glimpse of the colour were perceived, the accuracy of its recognition would be different if the cue was the original image than if it were the word ‘car’. RP, however, states that complex scenes are perceived holistically. If this is the case, the cue type should not matter, and the word ‘car’ should be sufficient in our example. In two experiments, we compared the influence of words and images as cues in the partial change report paradigm; we found that the cue type did not influence accuracy.

We thus had two alternative hypotheses:

PAH—Accuracy in the image cue condition > accuracy in the word cue condition.

RP—Accuracy in the image cue condition = accuracy in the word cue condition.

We could state the experimental logic as a modus tollens argument:

If participants reconstruct objects from cues, then words (which afford less reconstruction) will lead to worse objective performance.

We observed that words and images had similar objective rates of accuracy.

Therefore, participants do not reconstruct objects from cues.

One can accept this logic without accepting the premises. First, we never demonstrated that words allow less reconstruction than images. Second, we collected moderate Bayesian evidence for the accuracy rates of words and images being the same. It is possible, however, that reconstruction is reduced with word cues, but our paradigm was too coarse to reveal it. Third, even though we replicated our results, there could be something particular about our lab that will prove to be not generalisable. In line with the Duhem–Quine thesis, it can thus be argued that our experiment falsified no theory definitively. Still, our results strengthened the RP theory and revealed issues for PAH to address. In the following paragraphs, we will argue that our study provides a background for the formulation of generalisable guidelines for comparing theories.


The anatomy of our theoretical comparison

Asking good questions is acknowledged in SI, but this approach does not provide explicit guidelines. It may, thus, be valuable to flesh out how we reached the opposing hypotheses. We began by focusing on fundamental questions that both theories may answer. Our goal was to find common ground and identify whether, within that ground, we could formulate diverging predictions. We created based on our analysis of the two theories.

After creating an overview of the two theories, we went through a series of steps that can be generalized. These steps may allow others to select theories and formulate opposing hypotheses:


Step 1. Define the theory scope

When performing theoretical comparisons, one should select theories that address the same research problem. For example, it is hard to conduct a meaningful comparison of two theories if one addresses the contents of consciousness, whereas the other relates to states. In our approach, we compared two theories that address the contents of consciousness and consider the mechanism behind the richness of experience.


Step 2. Check whether the theories’ assumptions are not contradictory

Theories addressing the same research problem might start from contradictory assumptions, which can render a comparison useless to some extent. For example, suppose you wish to compare IIT with another theory. In that case, both should agree with, or at least be able to accept, the axioms of IIT relevant to the comparison. If the other theory claimed that consciousness is not unified, which directly contradicts one of IIT’s axioms, the comparison could be disputable. Consider, therefore, if contradictory assumptions could affect the interpretation of the same empirical evidence.


Step 3. Define an essential position on which the theories disagree

If you want to pit two theories against each other, there must be a point of disagreement. This seems crucial in order to propose a paradigm that would allow us to disentangle the compared theories. In our case, RP assumes that experience is rich and filled with information from the external world. On the contrary, PAH assumes that experience appears rich but much is constructed from priors (expectations). This step requires the identification of an effect or a feature that is essential for understanding consciousness. We devote the later section on finding criteria for consciousness theories to this topic.


Step 4. Propose an operationalization

Formulate an operationalization that can test the essential position, i.e. a paradigm that allows model comparison. If possible, look for overlaps or similarities between paradigms that are typically used to empirically support either theory empirically. In our case, both the RP and PAH utilized the partial change report task. Different experimental manipulations within the same task, however, supported opposing hypotheses.


Step 5. Propose a critical test to measure opposing hypotheses

Once one has a shared paradigm, one needs to define a critical test to compare the theories. In our example, if the performance in a partial change report task is based on rich representations, the type of cue presented should not matter for the task performance. Thus, we assume that if RP is correct, it should not matter whether we cue with a word or an image. If the performance in a partial change report task is based on a reconstruction of the external world, the image cue should be more effective than the word cue in fostering the reconstruction of the original image.


Step 6. Use results to infer which hypothesis has gained support

If the critical test is well designed, the result allows us to judge the competing hypotheses. In our case, the results show no difference between the cue types. Thus, RP seems to be more in line with the results than PAH.

When going through the above steps, be aware of the specific assumptions of each theory concerning the area of your investigation. If you overlook a crucial assumption, your conclusions may be rejected from a theoretical standpoint. An exemplary paper (de Gardelle et al. 2009) employed masking in a partial report paradigm and interpreted the results as evidence against RP. According to RP, however, visual masking disturbs unreported weak experiences. Therefore, Block (2011) dismissed the interpretation. If de Gardelle et al. had employed a paradigm more similar to the original Sperling paradigm, that would have given them a stronger case.

In the previous sections, we discussed how to perform meaningful comparisons, but we have not touched upon the areas in which such comparisons may be most important. Specifying this would aid the work needed for Step 3: defining essential positions. Before comparing theories, it is essential to identify the topic of comparison. Should it be a specific empirical effect that a consciousness theory should explain (Doerig et al. 2020) or a more general set of features we associate with consciousness?


Areas of comparison for empirical theories of consciousness

In a recent paper, Doerig et al. (2020) laid out four criteria that they deemed each consciousness theory should address. As an example, they propose the unfolding argument. Theories proposing that specific arrangements of neurons are necessary for consciousness should explain their reasoning. For instance, it is a mathematical fact that feedforward networks can mimic the input–output function of recurrent networks (Doerig et al. 2020). Therefore, any theory stating that recurrent processes are necessary for consciousness needs to address why this is indeed the case.

In the published responses to Doerig et al. (2020), the authors’ diagnosis concerning the multitude of theories was generally acknowledged. In contrast, there was disagreement with their criteria and assumptions. Most notably, some commentators pointed out that Doerig et al. focused only on a functionalist approach to consciousness (Fahrenfort and van Gaal 2020) and that their criteria were generally not atheoretical (Naccache 2020). Considering the shortcomings of Doerig et al. approach, we sought inspiration in other fields of cognitive science.

The theoretical diversity seen in consciousness research is not unique and as Northoff and Lamme (2020) were inspired by theory comparison in physics and biology, we believe an inspiration can be found in cognitive science. For example, several of the issues discussed so far were addressed in a recent paper by WM researchers (Oberauer et al. 2018). The paper, written by authors of several often-opposing theories, points out the plethora of theories and empirical results concerning WM. They further discuss that each theory only explains a subset of the empirical results that are most often observed in the field: which of the results each theory explains often seem arbitrary. To reduce this idiosyncrasy, they surveyed their colleagues about which empirical effects were most relevant to WM and were most robustly replicated across diverse paradigms. From this, they created a series of benchmarks on which there was a wide agreement in the field (but see: Logie 2018; Vandierendonck 2018).

While the approach of Oberauer et al. seems reasonable for WM, it is less obvious if it can also work for consciousness, especially because it may not be possible to define consciousness in purely functional terms, which is how WM is currently characterized. Pinto and Stein (2020, 2) write: ‘[C]onsciousness science faces a unique problem. Unlike nearly all other scientific problems, the aim is not to explain a certain observable function but a first-person phenomenon’. Perhaps agreements on benchmark empirical findings are rendered difficult due to the uniqueness of the consciousness phenomenon?

Instead of focusing on specific empirical phenomena for theory comparison, we can move to a higher level of abstraction. Continuing the analogy with the WM field, Oberauer et al. associated benchmarks with features of WM. For example, the effect of set size on accuracy is associated with the core feature of WM: the ability to hold limited amounts of information for current processing, which is defined as memory capacity.

Maybe instead of finding empirical benchmarks that everyone would agree to be crucial for defining consciousness, we could start by defining the core features of consciousness. For purely exemplary reasons, these may include (i) qualitativecharacter—‘what it is like’; (ii) phenomenalstructure—intentional and representational organization, unity; (iii) self-perspectiveorganization—the role of the subject and (iv) dynamicflow (based on Van Gulick 2018).

Suppose we could decide which features of consciousness are crucial in describing this phenomenon. In that case, we could move the existing theories closer together. Identifying the criteria (be they empirical phenomena or defining features) that a theory of consciousness should account for is good ground preparation for comparing theories. It could help narrow down the process by focusing on the defining features (as we did in) instead of all the possible predictions that the theories of interest make. A set of the essential positions a theory of consciousness should account for would substantially aid with comparing theories (see Step 3 in the description of our approach). Additionally, it would help to determine whether a theory has any ‘blank spots’ regarding what is considered a defining feature for a theory of consciousness. For instance, one theory could claim that attention is essential to consciousness. In contrast, another theory might not even use the term.

Importantly, decisions on such core features should be made by the community rather than by individual research groups, as the latter may view things through a specific theoretical lens. For instance, one could argue that the five axioms from IIT are an attempt to do exactly what we ask for. But as they have been criticized, we came up with some examples that seem less controversial to us.

For these reasons, the few features we suggest should be seen as merely the starting point for a wider discussion. Such discussions might be undertaken as part of a separate event at a conference, a dedicated grant proposal focused on theoretical comparison, a workshop, a questionnaire or as a collaboration on a paper similar to one recently written by visual metacognition researchers (Rahnev et al. 2021).


Discussion

The field of consciousness research seems flourishing in terms of the number of publications and conferences. However, contradictory theories are often available, and they are often not related to each other. Are the critics (Irvine 2014; Doerig et al. 2020) correct in their diagnosis that researchers often find evidence to support their theory of choice rather than progress the field? We did not find evidence to the contrary with our brief review. For IIT and GWT, which are two of the most widely supported theories, 93% of the papers published in the last decade did not even mention the opposite theory. We have proposed a way to address this siloing: employing multiple hypotheses based on different theories.

Based on experience from another field of cognitive science, directly comparing competing views can help to clarify theoretical views and reach some points of consensus. In the field of WM, adversarial collaborations have at least seemed to bring competing theories closer together (Cowan et al. 2020). This is not a panacea, but it may well be the right direction for the consciousness field, especially if we remember we share a similar issue with WM. There are too many theories that are developing in isolation from each other.

SI could be an approach for individual researchers to make theories relate more directly to each other, especially if the six theoretical steps we offer are used. The steps may likely be improved upon with further iterations. Still, they worked for us and, given their general character, will likely work in other cases too.

Of the steps we propose, translating theories into ‘the same language’ is crucial. Empirical tests of hypotheses would be further aided if more similar terms were natively used in different theories. However, to do this will require wide discussions in the field about what a theory of consciousness is supposed to explain. In WM, a broad representation of theorists aimed to establish which empirical results a theory of WM should explain (Oberauer et al. 2018). The discussions in our field should perhaps be even more general and ideally happen amongst researchers with diverging views. We have already seen suggestions from a few authors regarding the crucial criteria that a consciousness theory should address (Doerig et al. 2020). They were lauded for their attempt by other researchers, who nonetheless often disagreed with the specifics (Fahrenfort and van Gaal 2020; Naccache 2020). We need to aim for consensus on the specific criteria or features that a consciousness theory should account for to stimulate progress in our field.

Suppose theories can converge on terminology and agree on the most relevant features. In that case, this could even lead to fewer theories in the long run. Imagine, for instance, that representatives of Theory X agree that a certain feature matters to consciousness. In that case, it would be difficult for them to explain away critical observations subsequently and say that they are not important to consciousness after all. However, the immediate goal of comparing theories is to create clarity rather than to dismiss theories. The latter may well not be possible in a single experiment in any final sense according to the Duhem–Quine thesis.

There may be many reasons why formal comparisons are rarely seen in our field today. Some could be personal reservations, like attachment to a single theory, fear of ‘sticking your neck out’ or the fact that more work needs to be done in the preparatory stages. With the growing popularity of study preregistration, researchers are already getting used to spending more time in this stage. As with preregistration, we believe that the issues related to the process will often be outweighed by the benefits. We have recently seen steps toward adversarial collaborations in our field with the high-profile Templeton project (Reardon 2019). Leading researchers from both IIT and GNW have reportedly agreed on predictions, but, to the best of our knowledge, they have not yet disclosed the details of their predictions. We hope this project will be fruitful, harmonize terminology and inspire other researchers to compare theories—even researchers without a high profile within a theory.

It is worth restating that we do not believe that formal comparisons and wide discussions are the only approaches that can progress our field. Exploratory research and construction of individual theories are still important parts of a mature research field. We do, however, believe that formal comparisons and wide discussions should be employed more often than they currently are.


V1 as an egocentric cognitive map

Paul Linton — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8439394, CC BY 4.0.

We typically distinguish between V1 as an egocentric perceptual map and the hippocampus as an allocentric cognitive map. In this article, we argue that V1 also functions as a post-perceptual egocentric cognitive map. We argue that three well-documented functions of V1, namely (i) the estimation of distance, (ii) the estimation of size, and (iii) multisensory integration, are better understood as post-perceptual cognitive inferences. This argument has two important implications. First, we argue that V1 must function as the neural correlates of the visual perception/cognition distinction and suggest how this can be accommodated by V1’s laminar structure. Second, we use this insight to propose a low-level account of visual consciousness in contrast to mid-level accounts (recurrent processing theory; integrated information theory) and higher-level accounts (higher-order thought; global workspace theory). Detection thresholds have been traditionally used to rule out such an approach, but we explain why it is a mistake to equate visibility (and therefore the presence/absence of visual experience) with detection thresholds.

Keywords: V1, retinal map, cognitive map, visual consciousness, predictive coding, multisensory integration


Introduction

Since ‘The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map’ (O’Keefe and Nadel 1978), we typically distinguish between V1 as an egocentric perceptual map and the hippocampus as an allocentric cognitive map. In this article, we explain why V1 also functions as an egocentric cognitive map.

To the extent that cognitive processing has been discussed in V1, it has focused on (i) the allocation of attention, (ii) top-down influences on perception, and (iii) the transition from egocentric perception to allocentric navigation. By contrast, in this article, we argue that three well-documented functions of V1, namely (i) the estimation of distance, (ii) the estimation of size, and (iii) multisensory integration, are better understood as post-perceptual cognitive inferences. To outline the following sections of this article:

In ‘V1 as a spatial map’, we outline how the field’s understanding of V1 has evolved from a retinal map, to a depth map, to a distance map, to a size map, to a multisensory map.

In ‘V1 as an egocentric cognitive map’, we explain why our recent experimental work suggests that the last three developments, namely the perception of distance, size, and multisensory integration, may be better thought of as purely cognitive in nature and therefore reflect V1 functioning as a cognitive as well as a perceptual map.

In ‘V1 as the neural correlate of the visual perception/cognition boundary’, we consider how V1 could fulfil this dual function by the potential distribution of perceptual and cognitive functions to different layers in V1.

In ‘Low-level theory of visual consciousness’, we explain why this commits us to a low-level account of visual consciousness in contrast to mid-level accounts (recurrent processing theory; integrated information theory) and higher-level accounts (higher-order thought; global workspace theory).


V1 as a spatial map

In this section, we outline how the field’s understanding of V1 as a spatial map has evolved from a retinal map in the early 20th century, to a depth map in the 1960s, to a distance map in the 1990s, to a size map in the early 2000s, and to a multisensory map in the last couple of decades.


V1 as a retinal map

V1 provides the initial, and largest, map of the retina in the cortex (Brewer et al. 2002; Dougherty et al. 2003). Adams and Horton (2003) illustrate just how literally V1 is a retinal map (or a ‘metabolic imprint of the retina’, as they put it) by mapping the shadows cast by retinal blood vessels in V1. The earliest evidence that V1 was retinotopically organized came from Panizza (1855), (Zago et al. 2000; Colombo et al. 2002), Munk (1881), and Henschen (1890). Building upon pre-existing associations between points on the retina and angular directions in the visual field (Kepler 1604; Descartes 1637; ‘local signs’: Lotze 1846; Hering 1879; 19th-century optometry: Atchison 1979; Johnson et al. 2011), Tatsuji Inouye, and then Gordon Holmes, plotted V1’s retinotopic map (Inouye: Inouye 1909; see Glickstein and Whitteridge 1987; Glickstein and Fahle 2000; Leff 2004; Jokl and Hiyama 2007; Leff 2015; Lindegger and Pless 2019; Holmes: Lister and Holmes 1916; Holmes 1918, see also Riddoch 1917), which was only accurately mapped in the last 30 years (Horton and Hoyt 1991; see Wandell et al. 2009; Carandini 2012).


V1 as a depth map?

Before 1960, it was generally believed that ‘binocular depth perception was based on high-level quasi-cognitive events’ (Bishop and Pettigrew 1986; see also Julesz 1960) and was therefore processed in higher visual areas. However, disparity selective neurons in V1 were posited by Pettigrew (1965) and found by Barlow et al. (1967) and Nikara et al. (1968). Although Barlow et al. (1967) suggested that this depth information would still have to be ‘sorted out by higher order visual neurones’, they suggested that these disparity selective neurons provided the ‘neural basis of stereopsis’. For a time, it seemed certain that V1 was the site of human stereoscopic depth processing, with Bishop and Pettigrew (1986) distinguishing between ‘Stereopsis before 1960: Mentalism Prevails’ and ‘Retreat from Mentalism begins in the 1960’s’.

However, contemporary reviews of the neural processing of depth perception strike a very different tone (Cumming and DeAngelis 2001; Parker 2007, Welchman 2011, Welchman and Kourtzi 2013; Parker et al. 2016; Bridge 2016). According to the literature, responses of binocular neurons in V1 ‘do not reflect perceived depth, but rather compute a local correlation between two images’ (Bridge 2016). So it is now widely accepted that depth perception is ‘extra-striate’ (post-V1) (Cumming and DeAngelis 2001).


V1 as a distance map

Although V1 is no longer thought of as a depth map, it is still thought to encode viewing distance. As Cumming and DeAngelis (2001) observe ‘Most of the complex questions have not been addressed at the neurophysiological level. One exception is the effect of viewing distance.’ Cumming and DeAngelis (2001) refer to Trotter et al. (1992) and Gonzalez and Perez (1998), but the principle dates back to Kepler (1604) and Descartes (1637). The closer an object is, the more the two eyes have to rotate to fixate upon it, and so this degree of eye rotation (or ‘vergence’) provides the visual system with the viewing distance. Trotter et al. (1992) found that neurons in V1 were responsive to changes in vergence, and this was confirmed in Trotter et al. (1993) and Trotter et al. (1996), where they used prisms to change the vergence angle whilst keeping the retinal image and accommodation constant.

Trotter and Celebrini (1999) complete the transition to thinking of V1 in spatiotopic rather than retinotopic terms by showing that half the cells in the monkey V1 are responsive to gaze direction (version eye movements). Importantly, gaze direction (version), when coupled with fixation distance (vergence), marks out a specific location in 3D space, implying that V1 cells ‘are dedicated to certain volumes of visual space’ (Trotter and Celebrini 1999).


V1 as a size map

Since the early 2000s, it has been suggested that the spatial map in V1 reflects the perceived angular size of objects rather than their retinal size, recasting V1 as a size map rather than a retinal map.

To explain this distinction, consider. Since the same car is pasted three times, each car in has the same retinal image size. And yet, the cars appear to be different sizes. The far car appears to take up more of the picture than the near car. This difference in perceived angular size is quantified at around a 20% difference in size (Murray et al. 2006; Fang et al. 2008). Importantly, Murray et al. (2006) found that the activation in V1 reflected the perceived angular size of the stimulus rather than its retinal size. It varied by 20% when participants looked from a near to a far pictorial object, reflecting almost perfectly the change in perceived angular size.

But how is it possible for the V1 to reorganize itself in this way? After all, V1 is supposed to be a retinal map. MacEvoy and Fitzpatrick (2006) hypothesized, and Ni et al. (2014) and He et al. (2015) found, that V1 receptive fields dynamically re-organize themselves according to the content of the picture (most likely from feedback from lateral occipital cortex (LOC); Zeng et al. 2020). This represents ‘a dynamic redrawing of the map of visual space’ (MacEvoy and Fitzpatrick 2006), where specific objects in the picture are seen as magnified or minified (Ni et al. 2014).

Another potential size constancy effect is ‘neurological zoom’. This is the suggestion that V1 magnifies the whole visual field with far fixation and minimizes it with near fixation. Marg and Adams (1970) argue that this is responsible for (i) the improvement of visual acuity at far fixation (Aubert and Foerster 1857; Schindel and Arnold 2010), and (ii) changes in the apparent size of after-images with fixation distance (Emmert’s law: Emmert 1881).

Sperandio et al. (2012) find that viewing distance modulates V1 activity when observers view an after-image (with Chen et al. 2019b finding that the time course suggests recurrent processing of the vergence signal in V1 and/or feedback from higher visual areas). And there is some suggestive evidence of vergence modulating receptive fields in V1 from Cottereau et al. (2014) and Marg and Adams (1970).

Sperandio et al. (2012) and Chen et al. (2019b) suggest that whilst pictorial size constancy is limited to 10–45% (the recent literature suggests around 20%: Murray et al. 2006; Fang et al. 2008), the scaling of after-images is near perfect because of the additional presence of triangulation cues (vergence, accommodation, binocular disparity, and motion parallax).

However, Chen et al. (2019a) were surprised to find that although their subjects experienced close to perfect size constancy in real-world viewing conditions, recorded neural activity could only account for half of this effect. The problem is that Sperandio et al. (2012), Chen et al. (2019b) and Chen et al. (2019a) all overlook the distinction between perceived physical size and perceived angular size. It is true that participants may judge the perceived physical size of objects almost perfectly in real-world viewing conditions. But that does not mean that the perceived angular size of an object never reduces with distance. There are two effects at play. First, angular size: Does the perceived angular size simply reflect the retinal image size or does it also incorporates perceptual effects (‘size constancy’)? Second, physical size: Our ability to judge the constant physical size of an object despite a reduction in its perceived angular size with distance. This is clearly a cognitive effect since it makes up whatever shortcomings there are in our perception.


V1 as a multisensory map

In the last couple of decades, there has been increasing evidence of V1 as the site of multisensory integration, with Murray et al. (2016) observing that ‘convergence and integration of information from different senses within low-level cortices is a rule rather than an exception (e.g. Ghazanfar and Schroeder 2006; van Atteveldt et al. 2014; De Meo et al. 2015; ten Oever et al. 2016)’. We find evidence of multisensory integration in V1 in three specific contexts:


Vision and sound

The quote from Murray et al. (2016) comes from audio–visual integration, where there is evidence of bottom-up signals travelling from the auditory cortex to V1 (see Falchier et al. 2002; Rockland and Ojima 2003 on monkeys; Beer et al. 2011 on humans).

In human fMRI, Calvert et al. (2001) find increased activation in V1 when a visual stimulus is accompanied by a synchronous sound, whilst Martuzzi et al. (2007) find that sound alone can activate V1. Watkins et al. (2006, studied the sound-induced flash illusion and find increased activation in V1 when one visual flash and two auditory beeps are experienced as two visual flashes. Studies also demonstrate that sound can modulate the orientation preference of neurons in layers 2/3 (Ibrahim et al. 2016; Chanauria et al. 2019; McClure and Polack 2019) and 5/6 (Chanauria et al. 2019) of V1, but not layer 4 (Ibrahim et al. 2016; Chanauria et al. 2019), emphasizing that we should not think of V1 as a single map, but instead consider the functional role of each layer (a point developed below).

In addition to these bottom-up effects, there is also evidence of top-down contextual effects (Petro et al. 2017). Vetter and colleagues show that the high-level semantic categories (‘bird singing’, ‘people talking’, and ‘traffic’) can be decoded from V1 in blindfolded (Vetter et al. 2014) and congenitally blind (Vetter et al. 2020) participants. By contrast, although Masuda et al. (2021) also find task-dependent signals in V1 in the blind visual field of participants with macular degeneration, these signals are not detectable in control participants, leading them to question the extent to which these top-down signals have an impact on normal visual processing in V1. Masuda et al. (2021) conclude that ‘top-down, modality independent signals are ordinarily suppressed by feedforward signals and become profound in the absence of retinal inputs.’


Vision and touch

Masuda et al. (2021) come to the same conclusion for the integration of vision and touch. Whilst they find touch signals are present in the blind visual field of participants with macular degeneration during active tasks, these signals are neither present when passively applied, nor are they found in normally sighted controls, suggesting that they merely reflect ‘task-related feedback signals rather than reorganized feedforward visual inputs.’ Similarly, Couto et al. (2019) found that neurons in the mouse V1 failed to respond to tactile stimuli when the mouse’s whiskers were passively stroked, suggesting that the impact of other modalities on V1 is restricted to modality-independent top-down effects.

Sadato et al. (1996) did find activation of V1 during braille reading by blind participants. However, this does not appear to reflect typical multisensory integration, so much as the recruitment of V1 for touch after a period of visual deprivation (Merabet et al. 2008; Bedny 2017). On the other hand, Merabet et al. (2004) did find a small effect of transcranial magnetic stimulation to V1 on sighted participants’ ability to discriminate the spacing of a row of dots felt by touch, potentially reflecting a compromised ability to assign spatial attention (Macaluso et al. 2000).


Vision and locomotion

The perception of self-motion relies on integrating retinal stimulation (optic flow) with signals about bodily motion, so this is a prime candidate for multisensory integration in V1.

We can distinguish between passive self-motion and active self-motion. In passive self-motion, Roberts et al. (2017) find increased activation in V1 in human participants when visual and vestibular cues are congruent, but no effect when they are incongruent. Roberts et al. (2018) also find that vestibular neuritis patients (who typically suffer from acute vertigo from impaired vestibular function) have reduced V1 activation in congruent conditions.

However, much of the recent attention has been on active self-motion, specifically in mice (for reviews see Busse et al. 2017; Pakan et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Saleem 2020). Niell and Stryker (2010) found increased firing in V1 with motion, and Keller et al. (2012) and Saleem et al. (2013) found that running in darkness activates V1. Ayaz et al. (2013) also found that motion reduces surround suppression, enabling V1 neurons to integrate over larger regions of visual space.

In terms of multisensory integration, Saleem et al. (2013) found that most of the V1 neurons that responded encoded a weighted sum between optic flow and running speeds. Furthermore, Keller et al. (2012) found that layer 2/3 of V1 is strongly modulated by a mismatch between actual and expected optic flow, leading them to suggest that V1 is engaged in predictive coding (Rao and Ballard 1999; Koch and Poggio 1999; Friston 2018), with Zmarz and Keller (2016) finding that this occurs locally at the level of the receptive fields of individual neurons (for further discussion of predictive coding of optic flow in V1 see Leinweber et al. 2017; Fridman and Petreanu 2017; Keller and Mrsic-Flogel 2018; Jordan and Keller 2020; Padamsey and Rochefort 2020).

Increasingly, V1 has been found to include the location of objects in the visual scene and their behavioural relevance (see Pakan et al. 2018; Saleem 2020; Flossmann and Rochefort 2021). Ji and Wilson (2007) found that during sleep V1 replayed the same experience (presumably as dreams) as the hippocampus. Poort et al. (2015) found that perceptual learning led to an increase in the response of layer 2/3 to a visual stimulus, and Fiser et al. (2016) found different responses to the same visual stimulus depending on where it was encountered in the environment, with both studies also finding neurons that anticipated the stimulus. There is increasing evidence that these responses are due to top-down feedback from the anterior cingulate cortex and likely also the retrosplenial cortex (Fiser et al. 2016). Pakan et al. (2018b) find that the layer 2/3 neurons that encode spatial position also respond to self-motion defined estimates of distance when visual cues are absent and give their results a predictive coding explanation (Pakan et al. 2018a).

Other studies that report subjective position in V1 include Saleem et al. (2018) and Diamanti et al. (2020) (in layer 2/3) and Fournier et al. (2020) (in layers 4/6), but they have a slightly different focus. Pioneering parallel recording in V1 and the hippocampus, they ask how we get from egocentric (vision, V1) to allocentric (navigation, hippocampus) models of the environment? Because Fournier et al. (2020) find that the effect of subjective estimates of position is reduced around visual landmarks, they suggest that V1 plays an early role in navigation by recalibrating estimates of the distance travelled when a salient visual landmark is passed.


V1 as an egocentric cognitive map

The last section on multisensory integration demonstrates increasing evidence of non-visual top-down processing in V1. What is this processing for? We outline the three explanations in the literature before advancing our own proposal that, in addition to a retinal map, V1 acts as a post-perceptual egocentric cognitive map.


Anchoring the hippocampus’ cognitive map

We classically draw a distinction between V1 as an egocentric visual map and the hippocampus as an allocentric cognitive map (Tolman 1948; O’Keefe and Nadel 1978). As we just saw, one explanation for non-visual processing in V1 is that V1 plays an early role in calibrating the allocentric cognitive map (navigation, hippocampus) to our current egocentric visual experience (perception, V1) (see also Nau et al. 2018). This is one facet of a very active research question that seeks to explain how we ‘anchor the cognitive map to the visual world’ (Julian 2017), with others also pointing to egocentric, as well as allocentric, frames of reference in the hippocampus as another potential mechanism (see Wang et al. 2020 for a review). The key thing to recognize is that this research agenda maintains the classic distinction between egocentric (vision, V1) and allocentric (cognitive map, hippocampus) models of the environment. The underlying assumption of this line of research is that visual perception is egocentric and spatial cognition is allocentric, and the question is how we translate between them.


Cognitive penetration

There are two paradigms in the multisensory literature (Couto et al. 2019). The first treats multisensory integration in V1 as bottom-up, and horizontal, rather than hierarchical (Watkins et al. 2006). However, given the prevalence of top-down multisensory signals reviewed in the last section, this leads to the suggestion that bottom-up processes in V1 are subject to top-down ‘cognitive penetration’ (Vetter and Newen 2014; Newen and Vetter 2017). What this means is that these top-down signals are influencing our visual experience. Take the findings by Poort et al. (2015) and Fiser et al. (2016) that expectations lead to an increased response in V1. Poort et al. (2015) suggest that this provides the observer with ‘enhanced and more distinct representations of task-relevant stimuli’, and Fiser et al. (2016) suggest that it works to ‘enhance the discriminability of similar stimuli in different contexts.’


Predictive processing

The second, more radical, but increasingly orthodox paradigm in the multisensory literature treats perception as one large predictive process (Rao and Ballard 1999; Keller and Mrsic-Flogel 2018; Petro et al. 2017; Newen and Vetter 2017 also frame their work in these terms). On this account, perception is hierarchical, and the perception/cognition distinction is effectively eradicated. This is consistent with predictive (Bayesian) models of visual perception (Knill and Richards 1996; Trommershauser et al. 2011; Frith 2013) according to which (at least on one popular interpretation) we see what we predict.


Post-Perceptual cognitive processing

Both ‘cognitive penetration’ and ‘predictive processing’ are committed to the idea that top-down signals to V1 influence our visual experience. With the exception of the suggestion that V1 provides the early stages of anchoring the hippocampus’ cognitive map, it is a truism of the literature that V1 processing equates with visual processing. By contrast, we argue that V1 is the site of egocentric spatial cognition, as well as egocentric spatial perception.

The account of visual perception I develop in Linton (2017) (reviewed by Erkelens 2018, and elaborated in Linton 2018f, 2021a; the Brains Blog: Linton, 2018a; 2018b, 2018c, 2018d, 2018e and two experimental papers: Linton 2020, 2021b) argues that many of the supposedly basic aspects of visual perception are better understood as post-perceptual cognitive influences. This includes (i) visual scale (the size and distance of objects; see Linton 2017, pp.134–136, 2018f), (ii) visual shape from multiple depth cues (depth cue integration; see Linton 2017, chapter 2), (iii) pictorial cues and pictorial perception (Linton 2017, chapter 3), and (iv) multisensory integration (Linton 2017, pp.65–66). However, as Erkelens (2018) notes, a ‘shortcoming of the book is that … it does not discuss the new theory in relation to the neurophysiology of the visual system.’ The purpose of this article is to rectify this shortcoming.

Given our survey of V1 in Section 1, the implications of my theory for the neurophysiology of the visual system become apparent. On one hand, as we saw in Section 1, both visual scale (the size and distance of objects) and multisensory integration are now regarded as paradigmatic V1 processes. On the other hand, under my account, both visual scale (the size and distance of objects) and multisensory integration are automatic post-perceptual cognitive inferences. This leads us to the conclusion that, in addition to V1 functioning as an egocentric perceptual map, V1 must also be functioning as a post-perceptual egocentric cognitive map.

In the rest of this section, I will focus on substantiating this claim. But before I do, I need to explain what I mean by ‘automatic post-perceptual cognitive inferences’.


Perception/cognition distinction

We mark the ‘perception’/‘cognition’ boundary as the point at which mental processes become ‘about’ our perceptual experience rather than ‘contributing to’ our perceptual experience. We define ‘perceptual experience’ as experience in any sensory modality; for instance, visual experience (what we), auditory experience (what we hear) and tactile experience (what we feel through touch). And the focus of Linton (2017) is to try to understand which visual cues contribute to our visual experience, as opposed to merely influencing our cognition or understanding of our experience.

To make this distinction clearer, we consider the example of reading. We argue that two people have the same visual experience of words on a page if one can read and the other cannot, even though they have very different cognitive experiences of them. In this way, being able to read changes our experience of a visual stimulus, without changing our visual experience of the stimulus (understanding or attributing meaning often has an experiential quality, see Strawson 1994; Bayne and Montague 2011 on ‘cognitive phenomenology’). We believe that reading captures a common intuition about the ‘perception’/‘cognition’ distinction. Defining reading as ‘perceptual’, as opposed to ‘cognitive’, would appear to define ‘perception’ too broadly. Indeed, one wonders what, if any, automatic cognitive process that relies on visual input (driving, navigation, etc.) would be excluded by such a broad definition of ‘perception’.

We apply the thought about reading to the interpretation of signs more broadly, which covers associations as diverse as understanding that there is fire by seeing smoke, understanding when to stop and when to go at a traffic light, understanding hand gestures, and understanding symbols like the McDonald’s logo (Atkin 2013). This attribution of meaning through association is, we argue, paradigmatic of post-perceptual cognitive processes. So, under our definition, work in computer vision based on object recognition in images (Tarr and Bulthoff 1998), as well as ventral stream processing that instantiates object recognition in the human cortex (Goodale and Milner 1992), should be thought of as cognitive rather than perceptual.

In Linton (2017), we go still further and argue that many apparently basic aspects of visual perception (size and distance, depth cue integration, multisensory integration, and pictorial cues and pictorial perception) are better thought of as automatic post-perceptual cognitive inferences about our visual experience, rather than contributing to our visual experience. Ultimately, this is an empirical question—we cannot rely on our introspection to tell us whether a process contributes to our visual experience or not—and so the focus of this section is on presenting our empirical data that suggest that a number of well-studied V1 processes are purely cognitive in nature.

This is a broad definition of ‘cognition’. Cognition can be unconscious (we are unaware of it at work), automatic (we do not have to do anything), and involuntary (we often cannot overrule it). Most cognitive scientists accept a broad definition of ‘cognition’ (see Heyes in Bayne et al. 2019; ‘System 1’ vs. ‘System 2’ in Kahneman 2011). And this was how ‘cognition’ was conceived during the ‘cognitive revolution’ of the 1960s, a term Neisser (1967) coined to ‘do justice … to the continuously creative process by which the world of experience is constructed.’

“Visual cognition … deals with the processes by which a perceived, remembered, and thought-about world is brought into being from as unpromising a beginning as the retinal patterns.” Neisser (1967)

However, unlike most cognitive scientists, I do not believe these ‘mid-level’ processes contribute to our visual experience. In Linton (2017), I therefore draw a sharp distinction between my own approach and contemporary approaches to ‘visual cognition’ (Cavanagh 2011). Again, this is not necessarily counter-intuitive. The more ‘mid-level’ processes we add to vision, the more we open the door to the suggestion that (in Cavanagh 2011‘s words) ‘our visual systems, on their own, rank with the most advanced species in cognitive evolution.’

“...the unconscious inferences of the visual system may include models of goals of others as well as some version of the rules of physics. If a ‘Theory of Mind’ could be shown to be independently resident in the visual system, it would be a sign that our visual systems, on their own, rank with the most advanced species in cognitive evolution.”

And, by equating ‘vision’ with any automatic process that relies on visual input, we go far beyond visual experience. For instance, in Glennerster (2016) ‘the visual system’ is now responsible for performing our everyday tasks, such as getting a mug from another room:

“The visual system must somehow know that the mug is behind one door rather than another, even if it does not store the three-dimensional location of the mug.”

This is the problem we lead ourselves into by identifying every visually informed unconscious inference or automatic process as ‘visual perception’.

In contrast to my negative (‘not visual experience’) definition of cognition (Linton 2017; see also Brainard in Bayne et al. 2019), most philosophers adopt a positive and high-level definition of ‘cognition’ (e.g. Bayne in Bayne et al. 2019; see Heyes in). This is typically what people mean when they ask whether ‘cognition’ penetrates ‘perception’ (Pylyshyn 1999; Firestone and Scholl 2016). But this definition of ‘cognition’ is liable to distort discussions. For instance, Knotts et al. (2020) describe automatic inferences about perception as ‘intra-perceptual’ rather than ‘post-perceptual’ or ‘cognitive’ because automatic inferences are immune from ‘cognitive penetration’. But this new category (‘intra-perceptual’) risks conflating our biased post-perceptual judgements about our perceptual experience [when ‘subjective evaluation of (our visual experience) is systematically biased, or inflated’] with perceptual experience itself, both of which may be immune to ‘cognitive penetration’.

The essential question of the ‘perception’/‘cognition’ distinction is whether a process contributes to our visual experience or not? (Linton 2017; Brainard in Bayne et al. 2019; a point Abid 2019 makes well in response to Odegaard et al. 2018). Knotts et al. (2020) appear to suggest that the answer to this question in the context of ‘intra-perception’ is ‘yes’, in which case it is hard to see why we need a new category, in addition to ‘perception’.

Knotts et al. (2020) give three examples of ‘intra-perceptual’ biases: (i) the Müller–Lyer illusion, (ii) multisensory integration, and (iii) amodal completion. But all three examples seem to fit quite neatly within the existing ‘perception’/‘cognition’ distinction. Most vision scientists would agree with Knotts et al. (2020) that both the Müller–Lyer illusion and multisensory integration affect our visual experience, and this is why most scientists would refer to them as ‘perceptual’. By contrast, I argue that the Müller–Lyer illusion and multisensory integration do not affect our visual experience, and this is why I refer to them as merely ‘cognitive’ (Linton 2017, pp.60–66, 2018b). Amodal completion is an interesting case. I agree with Knotts et al. (2020) that many would regard amodal completion as ‘perceptual’. However, I disagree with Knotts et al. (2020) that the borders of the occluded object are ‘still visually represented’ in amodal completion. As Knotts et al. (2020) themselves admit, amodal completion is merely just ‘a feeling’. In which case, it is merely an automatic cognitive inference about our percept and fits naturally within ‘cognition’. Note also that Bergmann et al. (2019) were unable to decode amodal completion in V1, suggesting that this effect is very much a purely cognitive process.

Having outlined how I draw the distinction between ‘perception’ and ‘cognition’, let me now substantiate why I believe that visual scale (size and distance) and multisensory integration fall on the ‘cognition’ side of the distinction, with an emphasis on V1 processing.


V1 as a cognitive distance map

You will recall that the viewing distance is instantiated in V1 using vergence eye movements (Trotter et al. 1992) so that ‘the visuo-oculomotor transformation process appears to start as early as the primary visual cortex’ (Trotter et al. 1993).

But is this a ‘perceptual’ or ‘cognitive’ process? Applying the ‘perception’/‘cognition’ distinction we outlined above, the question is whether eye movements really affect our visual experience? One way to test this is to vary vergence gradually, and see if vergence still has an effect on our visual experience and, therefore, on our distance judgements, even when participants are subjectively unaware that their eyes have moved. In Linton (2020), I tested this by gradually manipulating vergence and found that participants were unable to use their visual experience to judge distance. Instead, they were effectively guessing.

These results are complemented by our results in Linton (2021b) on size perception (discussed below). Together they pose a real challenge to the suggestion that eye movements affect our visual experience. This work has two important implications.

First, we are not challenging Trotter et al. (1992)’s finding that vergence is encoded in V1. However, since vergence is encoded in V1 and since vergence does not appear to affect our visual experience, we conclude that V1 must be cognitively (and not perceptually) encoding egocentric distance from vergence. V1 might be encoding another distance cue that does affect our visual experience. However, the point developed in Linton (2018f) and Linton (2020) is that all of our other absolute distance cues are either similarly ineffective (absolute motion parallax, vertical disparities) or merely cognitive (familiar size) in nature. In any case, this is not essential to the point since Trotter et al. (1992) specifically test absolute distance signals in V1 in reduced cue conditions in order to isolate the vergence signal from other absolute distance cues.

Second, if vergence (eyes moving in the opposite direction) does not affect our visual experience, we have to question whether version (eyes moving in the same direction) does? Version eye movements are thought to be essential for visual direction (in order to convert retinotopic coordinates into spatiotopic coordinates). So, unless eye movements affect our visual experience, we are forced to conclude that visual direction is also merely cognitive. This will be the focus of future experiments. It also opens up the question of whether retinal stability is merely cognitive. This is because the visual system is making roughly three saccades per second (Yarbus 1967). So unless eye movements affect our visual experience (Keller and Mrsic-Flogel 2018), the stabilization of the visual scene over time would have to be merely cognitive as well.


V1 as a cognitive size map

What about the size constancy effects reported in V1. Are they ‘perceptual’ or merely ‘cognitive’? You’ll recall that Sperandio et al. (2012) draw a distinction between size constancy (i) in the real world (which, according to Sperandio et al. 2012 is close to perfect) and (ii) in pictures (which is around 20%; Murray et al. 2006).


Real-world size constancy

Sperandio et al. (2012) suggest that in full cue conditions their fMRI results show that V1 represents the perceived rather than retinal size of the object. Size constancy is close to perfect, they argue, because in addition to pictorial cues, in real-world viewing, participants have access to additional depth cues including vergence, binocular disparity, and motion parallax. However, the participants in Sperandio et al. (2012) did not have motion parallax (they were in an fMRI scanner), and binocular disparity is thought to primarily rely on vergence to provide absolute distance information (Wallach and Zuckerman 1963). So it is no surprise that a central question is how reliant we are on vergence for size constancy.

A key site for this discussion is the Taylor illusion (Taylor 1941). Here, participants view an after-image of their hand (which fixes the retinal size of their hand) in complete darkness, and then move their hand forward or backward in space. Taylor (1941) found that participants report that the hand appears to shrink when brought close to the face and expand when moved away. The accepted explanation of the Taylor illusion is that it is entirely due (Taylor 1941; Morrison and Whiteside 1984; Mon-Williams et al. 1997) or almost entirely due (Sperandio et al. 2013) to changes in vergence as the eyes track the hand in darkness (see also Gregory et al. 1959; Carey and Allan 1996; Bross 2000; Ramsay et al. 2007; Faivre et al. 2017a and on vergence scaling; Urist 1959; Suzuki 1986; Lou 2007; Zenkin and Petrov 2015).

However, the problem with these experiments is that they rely on manipulating the vergence angle in a way that informs the participant about the change in fixation distance, by asking participants to track their own hand as it moves. These experiments are therefore open to an alternative cognitive explanation, namely that changes in vergence do not affect the perceived angular size of the hand but merely affect our cognitive understanding of its size given its fixed angular size and our subjective knowledge about our changing fixation distance.

In order to differentiate between these two interpretations, we replicated the vergence changes in Sperandio et al. (2013) (distance change from 50 to 25 cm over 5 seconds) but this time controlling for any cognitive knowledge about the change in distance by having participants track a visual target rather than an light-emitting diode (LED) or their hand. Tracking their own hand clearly gives participants knowledge about their changing gaze position. So too does an LED moving in depth, because the eyes are very bad at tracking a single point moving in depth, leading to retinal slip (motion of the LED on the retina). By contrast, we used a 3° target to ensure that any retinal slip from the target moving in depth was undetectable. We found no evidence that vergence affects perceived size once subjective knowledge about the changing gaze position has been controlled for (Linton 2021b). We therefore conclude that the vergence size constancy effects reported in the literature are merely cognitive rather than perceptual.


Size constancy in pictures

What about the pictorial size constancy in Murray et al. (2006)? There is no denying that the car at farther distance seems to take up more of the picture than the near car in. But a key point of Linton (2017) is that we cannot rely on introspection to tell us if an effect is perceptual or merely cognitive. Instead, a useful strategy is what we call ‘scaffolding’: introducing elements into the visual scene that help us to judge what we are seeing. In Linton (2018b), we apply this logic to pictorial size constancy, as well as the Müller–Lyer illusion. The claim in the literature, as Schwarzkopf (2015) rightly points out, is that pictorial size constancy works by ‘distorting the entire map of visual space through shifting the receptive fields as suggested by electrophysiological recordings.’ But if this is right, and pictorial size constancy really does distort visual space, by enlarging some regions and shrinking others, then it should also equally distort any additional pictorial elements introduced into the picture. However, consider, an amended version of from Linton (2018b).

According to the logic of the literature, the squares that bound the exact same area in visual space as the cars should be just as distorted in size as the cars. But this is not what we experience in. Instead, the size difference, if any, between the squares is vastly reduced. So what we took to be a perceived change in size between the cars is actually entirely (our position), or almost entirely (if you insist there is a small difference in size between the squares), a cognitive effect.


V1 as a cognitive multisensory map

This way of thinking about the ‘perception’/‘cognition’ distinction also leads us to reinterpret multisensory integration as cognitive rather than perceptual. The central question is whether multisensory integration actually affects our visual experience, rather than merely our interpretation of it. And we appeal to four specific examples to argue that it does not.


Mandatory fusion

In Linton (2017), we argue that different kinds of visual depth cues (pictorial cues and binocular disparity) are not perceptually integrated, but merely cognitively integrated. This is because the experiments that test visual cue integration (Hillis et al. 2002) test the stimuli in highly artificial conditions conducive to visual cues being judged to be perceptually fused when they are not. And, if merely cognitive integration explains the integration of visual cues, then we would also expect it to explain less immediate effects like multisensory integration.

But you do not need to accept my analysis of visual cue integration to come to this conclusion. If two cues are perceptually integrated, you would expect a change in one of them in one direction to cancel out a change in the other in the other direction. This is known as ‘mandatory fusion’. But Hillis et al. (2002) find that unlike visual cues, multisensory integration (between vision and touch) is not subject to ‘mandatory fusion’. Similarly, failures in ‘mandatory fusion’ have been found in vision and sound (Caziot and Mamassian 2017) and vision and vestibular cues (Ash et al. 2011). This raises the following dilemma (Linton 2018a). Where, perceptually, are these multisensory percepts experienced? Not in vision, which reports the visual estimate. And not in touch, which reports the touch estimate. So there does not appear to be a sensory experience where we actually experience the multisensory integration. It does not change our visual experience, and it does not change our tactile experience. So where is it? (Contrast this with the suggestions in the next paragraph that visual experience ‘relies on multimodal signals’ and that ‘visual consciousness is shaped by the body’). Instead, we conclude (Linton 2017, p.66) that ‘the absence of mandatory fusion in … cross-modal perception appears to suggest that when information is integrated in these contexts it is by virtue of an integrated judgement rather than an integrated percept.’


Taylor illusion

Our approach to vergence eye movements provides a model for multisensory integration more generally. Sperandio et al. (2013) find that hand movements, and not just the change in vergence, directly affects the perceived size of the after-image of the hand in the Taylor illusion. They demonstrate this by showing that the strength of the illusion is marginally reduced when vergence and the hand move in opposite directions. Consequently, the Taylor illusion is thought to provide evidence for the suggestion that vision ‘relies on multimodal signals’ (Sperandio et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2018) and that ‘visual consciousness is shaped by the body’ (Faivre et al. 2015, 2017a,b). But if, as we argue in Linton (2021b), the integration of the retinal image with the proprioceptive sensation of our own vergence eye movements is purely cognitive (and this is the major driver of the Taylor illusion), then it becomes very likely that the integration of the retinal image with the proprioceptive sensation of our own hand movements is also purely cognitive when this is a minor driver of the Taylor illusion. This cognitive interpretation of the influence of hand movements on visual perception also suggests a cognitive interpretation of variants of the Taylor illusion that show multisensory integration with the rubber-hand illusion (Faivre et al. 2017a) and tool use (Grove et al. 2019).


Rubber-hand illusion

The rubber-hand illusion (Botvinick and Cohen 1998) poses another question. How is it that visual and tactile sensations can be spatially decoupled in this way? The traditional explanation is that the signal from each sense is corrupted by noise (Trommershauser et al. 2011), so each signal is liable to give different spatial estimates. But the degree of decoupling involved in the rubber-hand illusion far exceeds what one would expect from two identical, but noisy, estimates of the same spatial location. Instead, in Linton (2018f), we argue that vision and touch can come apart in this way because they do not share a common metric. Put simply, they are not giving conflicting spatial information because they don’t operate in the same space. Without eye movements influencing visual perception, vision is retinotopic not spatiotopic (we put to one side the question of whether touch is head-centric or body-centric; if the latter, a further conversion between head-centric and body-centric coordinates would be required for vision). So without eye movements influencing visual perception, vision does not provide us with absolute distance or direction. Touch, we presume, does. And so a further, cognitive, step is required to convert vision into the same metric as touch so that they can be integrated. But this further, cognitive, step is subject to significant error. (Contrast this account with a very different cognitive interpretation of the rubber-hand illusion by Lush et al. 2020; Roseboom and Lush 2020, according to which there is no integration, perceptual or cognitive).


Self-motion

Finally, at the conceptual level, why should we expect multisensory integration to be perceptual? In Linton (2018f), we discuss this thought in the context of the integration of visual (optic flow) and vestibular cues to passive self-motion. Adding vestibular cues to optic flow increases the impression of self-motion over and above optic flow alone (Ash et al. 2011). But why would we expect this to affect our visual experience? It is not as if the optic flow has to be seen as flowing faster in order to incorporate this vestibular cue into our determination of self-motion. Instead, the visual (optic flow) and the non-visual (vestibular) cues merely feed into a common post-perceptual cognitive determination of speed.


V1 as the neural correlate of the visual perception/cognition boundary

We therefore argue that V1 is the site of the visual perception/cognition distinction, acting both as (i) the site of visual experience and (ii) where automatic post-perceptual inferences about our own visual experience occur.

Our suggestion of V1 as a cognitive map is a very different from Zhaoping (2014, ’s description of V1 as a ‘saliency map’. Zhaoping (2019)’s ‘saliency map’ is concerned with attributing cognitive meaning (saliency) to the scene prior to perception in order to drive eye movements to specific meaningful locations in the scene. This is because, under Zhaoping (2019) account, ‘V1 activities are unrelated to visual awareness’, and so fixational eye movements are required to pass the stimulus via attention to higher visual areas for visual awareness. Under Zhaoping (2019) account, (i) V1 is pre-perceptual, and (ii) Zhaoping (2019) ‘saliency map’ is a pre-perceptual ‘cognitive map’ of sorts. By contrast, we are arguing that (i) V1 is the site of visual experience (V1 as visual map), and also (ii) V1 is also the site of the first layer of post-perceptual cognition (V1 as cognitive map).

But how can V1 be both a visual map (providing our visual experience) and also a post-perceptual cognitive map (interpreting our visual experience), at the same time? We suggest that the answer lies in the laminar structure of V1. It is typical to distinguish between superficial (2/3), mid (4), and deep (5/6) layers of V1. Visual inputs from LGN feed primarily into layer 4C, so layer 4 would appear to be most likely area for ‘pure’ binocular visual experience divorced from cognitive inferences (cf. Fournier et al. 2020 on navigation; Self et al. 2013 on figure/ground; and, given my comments on motion below, Livingstone and Hubel 1988).

Differentiating between layers of V1 may also help us to explain why our visual experience does not appear to be high-pass spatially filtered, whilst this is regarded as a key aspect of V1 visual processing (Carandini 2012). For instance, if high-pass spatially filtering were primarily an aspect of layer 2/3 (feeding into higher visual areas), but the inputs at layer 4 remained unfiltered, and were experienced as visual perception, then this would provide a convincing explanation of why spatial filtering is a key aspect of V1 visual processing, and yet is not directly experienced.

Since higher visual areas predominantly feed into layer 2/3 and more distant cortical areas predominantly feed into layer into 5/6, one suggestion is that top-down influences to layer 2/3 are reflected in illusions that we experience as visual perception, whilst top-down influences to layer 5/6 are reflect as imagery (Bergmann et al. 2019; Koenig-Robert and Pearson 2021). One potential problem with this account is that Kok et al. (2016) find that the Kaniza triangle illusion only activates layer 5/6, not 2/3. However, it could be that the Kaniza triangle really is better thought of as a form of involuntary visual imagination (consistent with evidence in Kok et al. 2016 of attendant suppression of perception in layers 2/3 and 4), although we continue to prefer a purely cognitive interpretation of the Kaniza triangle (Linton 2017, p.11).

However, our key concern with Bergmann et al. (2019)’s and Koenig-Robert and Pearson (2021)’s suggestion that we experience layers 2/3 as visual perception, and layers 5/6 as imagery, is that visual inputs also affect layer 5/6, as if imagery and perception are being integrated. Instead, we regard one of two solutions as the most likely interpretation.

The simplest solution would be to regard layer 4 as the site of conscious visual experience (which we describe above as ‘pure’ binocular visual experience) and layers 2/3 and 5/6 as two different layers of cognitive processing. This is supported by Jordan and Keller (2020)’s finding of two different interactions between visual and motor signals in V1: comparison in layers 2/3 (for visual stability) and integration in layers 5/6 (for the integrated ‘percept’) (both of which I would give a cognitive interpretation) (see also Keller and Mrsic-Flogel 2018; Padamsey and Rochefort 2020). Further support comes from Self et al. (2013) on the time course of figure-ground segmentation in layers 2/3 and 5/6.

Another approach, which we also have some sympathy for, would be to regard layers 5/6 as the site of visual experience, over which bottom-up perception and top-down imagination compete, with dreams resulting when imagination wins that competition globally, and hallucinations resulting when imagination wins that competition in a local region of space.

Whichever interpretation is correct, the key point is that somewhere feedforward visual processing is dominant, and this is reflected as our visual experience.


Low-level theory of visual consciousness

If V1 is the first site of post-perceptual cognitive processing, then it must logically be the site of visual experience as well (unless you want to suggest that visual experience is situated prior to V1 in LGN, which is a conceptual possibility, but which V1 acting as the site of binocular integration appears to rule out).

Thinking of V1 as the site of visual experience provides some potentially helpful insights about the nature of visual ‘illusions’ which, because we give them a cognitive interpretation, are ‘better thought of as delusions (false judgements) rather than illusions (false percepts)’ (Linton 2017, pp.8, 69, 74). First, as we have already noted, Bergmann et al. (2019) were unable to decode amodal completion in V1, suggesting that this effect is very much a purely cognitive process. Second, Bergmann et al. (2019) were only able to decode the edges of the neon spreading illusion in V1. But the neon spreading illusion is of a single illusory surface. This suggests that the illusory surface in the neon spreading illusion is also cognitive rather perceptual.

Distinguishing between the layers of V1 (and arguing that feedforward processing in layer 4 reflects visual perception, whilst feedback processing from higher visual areas into layers 2/3 merely reflects cognition) leads us to embrace a low-level theory of visual consciousness, in contrast to mid-level theories (recurrent processing theory; integrated information theory) and higher-level theories (higher-order thought; global workspace theory). This is important, because most of the recent adversarial collaborations in consciousness science today have focused on adjudicating between mid- and higher-level approaches, whilst missing this third distinct alternative (Templeton grants 0567: He, Peters, Denison, Brascamp, Block, & Chalmers, ‘An adversarial collaboration to test predictions of first-order and higher-order theories of consciousness’, 2020−2023; 0484: Block, ‘Analyzing and merging theories of consciousness’, 2020−2023; and 21569: Block & Lau, ‘Arbitrating philosophical theories of consciousness by cognitive neuroscience experiments’, 2011−2015). Let me explain the differences between these different approaches, and why my third distinct alternative is required.


Higher-level theories (higher-order thought; global work space theory)

The key attribute of higher-level theories for our purposes is that they do not situate visual experience in the visual cortex (V1–V6). Classically, the distinction has been thought of in terms of whether the neural correlates of consciousness are in the front or the back of the brain (Boly et al. 2017; Odegaard et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019). The prefrontal cortex (PFC) has become the site of visual experience for higher-level theories of visual consciousness (Frith 2019), including global workspace theories (Dehaene and Naccache 2001) and higher-order thought theories (Lau 2019).


Mid-level theories (recurrent processing theory; integrated information theory)

Mid-level theories typically attribute visual consciousness to recurrent processing within the visual cortex (V1–V6), either as the basis of their account (recurrent processing theory; Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Lamme 2018) or because recurrent processing is thought to reflect information integration (integrated information theory; Tononi and Edelman 1998; Oizumi et al. 2014). Given the importance of recurrent processing, we might also include predictive coding accounts discussed above (Rao and Ballard 1999).

I will focus on a subset of these theories that explicitly suggest that V1 may be the site of visual experience, including Stoerig and colleagues (Stoerig and Cowey 1995; Stoerig 2001), Pollen, in limited circumstances (Pollen 1995), Lamme and colleagues (Lamme et al. 2000; Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Lamme 2003, Fahrenfort and Lamme 2012); Tong; Watkins et al. (2006); Rees (cf. Rees et al. 2002); see Boly et al. (2017) for a recent defence.


Low-level theories (my feedforward account)

Where I differ from these mid-level theories of visual consciousness is that they are unanimous in requiring feedback from higher visual areas to V1 for conscious visual perception (Lamme 2018). As Oizumi et al. (2014) note of both recurrent processing theory and information integration theory: ‘The idea that “feed-back”, “reentry”, or “recursion” of some kind may be an essential ingredient of consciousness has many proponents’. By contrast, the essence of my account is that recurrent processing from higher visual areas to V1 is not necessary for visual consciousness.

This is in keeping with mouse physiology where there are no corollaries for the higher visual areas required for such recurrent processing.

It is also in keeping with V1 as a cognitive map. On this account, as we have emphasized, feedforward visual processing in layer 4 reflects our visual experience (V1 as visual map), whilst feed-back visual processing from higher visual areas reflects cognitive processing (V1 as cognitive map). Which of these two approaches is correct? I will take Victor Lamme’s work (Lamme 2020) as my target and highlight three key distinctions between our theories. First, both Lamme (2020) and I (Linton 2017, Ch.1) agree that all leading theories of visual perception (including his) are ‘inferential’, but this is exactly what (from a theoretical perspective) I want to reject. Second, advocates of recurrent processing equate visibility with detectability, but I argue that this leads us into a paradox. Third, Fahrenfort and Lamme (2012) and I disagree as to what constitutes a good paradigm of ‘visual perception’. They focus on illusions, whilst I argue random-dot stereograms, which were favoured by the early vision literature of the 1960s-80s, but have recently fallen out of fashion, teach us the most about the mechanisms of visual experience.


Vision without inference

Lamme (2020) rightly identifies ‘inference’ as essential to all leading theories of vision (by inference I mean to include Lamme 2020‘s ‘categorizations’ and ‘interference’; cf.; Albertazzi et al. 2010, who reject a narrower sense of ‘inference’—‘inverse optics’—than Lamme 2020 and I are discussing). What I propose in Linton (2017), Ch.1 is a theory of vision without inference. By inference I mean the visual constancies, Gestalt groupings and the attribution of meaning to the retinal image. So just as we can distinguish between low-level, mid-level and higher-level theories of visual processing (Cavanagh 2011), we can distinguish between low-level (non-inferential), mid-level (recurrent processing theory; integrated information theory) and higher-level (higher-order thought; global workspace theory) theories of visual consciousness.

The essence of my account is that vision is not about anything. Vision is not trying to ‘represent’ anything, ‘predict’ anything or ‘convey’ anything. Perception is not involved ‘information processing’ or making ‘estimates’ about the external world (Neisser 1967; Miller 2003), much less is vision, or visual processing, in some sense ‘predictive’ (Frith 2013; Clark 2013). Instead, to borrow from a long tradition of naïve realists, I insist (Linton 2017, 74) that vision is ‘silent’, it makes no claims or representations (Austin 1962; Travis 2004). However, the claim that vision is ‘silent’ is not just the preserve of naïve realism. I develop my own account as a form of naïve or perceptual idealism (Linton 2018a, 2018d), and Papineau (2021) advances a similar claim from a sensationalist perspective. This is very different way of thinking of vision from Marr (1982)’s suggestion that ‘vision is the process of discovering from images what is present in the world and where it is.’

The question whether we can account for all of our visual experience without invoking ‘inference’ is an empirical one. First, as I outline below, we need to determine whether a process is properly categorized as ‘perceptual’ or ‘cognitive’. Second, if it truly is perceptual (as, for instance, I argue that depth from binocular disparity is), can it be accounted for in non-inferential terms (for instance, my argument that binocular depth is the product of rivalry eradication, rather than the visual system trying to estimate scene geometry).


Detection ≠ Perception

A key argument in favour of recurrent processing being necessary for visual consciousness is the suggestion that V1 activation on its own is subjectively undetectable and therefore invisible (Lamme et al. 2000; Koivisto and Revonsuo 2010; Koivisto et al. 2010; Lamme 2020). Lamme et al. (2000) point to the fact that subthreshold changes in colour and luminance are processed in V1 even though they are ‘objectively’ invisible to the observer. But underpinning this suggestion is the assumption that just because a change is not detected it is not perceived. And I argue that this is wrong. Let me explain why this is a shortcoming of signal detection theory.

Consider someone doing a contrast detection task being shown a series of stimuli in succession, one after the other. Imagine the stimulus is a luminous display that takes up their whole visual field. First, they are shown the display with one luminance. Then, this is replaced (without an interval) by a second stimulus where the display is now lighter than the first. But the participant cannot detect that the second stimulus is lighter. Does this mean that the luminance difference between the first and second stimulus is not apparent in their visual experience? Signal detection theory suggest so. But this leads to the following paradox. Now the second stimulus is replaced (without an interval) by a third stimulus that is lighter than the second stimulus, but again the difference is not detectable. And the third stimulus is replaced (without an interval) by a fourth stimulus that is lighter than the third stimulus but again the difference is not detectable. And so on. Clearly the observer’s visual experience is changing. For instance, had the first stimulus been replaced by the fourth stimulus the observer would have immediately noticed. But according to signal detection theory these changes are not just undetectable but invisible (i.e. they have no effect on our visual experience). And we argue this is wrong. The observer’s visual experience will change even though none of the individual changes were detectable. And yet this is the criterion of ‘invisibility’ that recurrent processing theorists employ.

A similar example would be gradual changes, e.g. someone who fails to detect the change in position of a clock hand over time. And a succession of small but undetectable changes is essentially what gradual change-blindness is. Simons et al. (2000) and Auvray and O’Regan (2003) suggested that these gradual changes are not only undetectable but also imperceptible (i.e. they’re subjectively invisible). We maintain that the same logic illustrates why this cannot be the case. Imagine that a region of the picture is gradually changing from its initial red to blue. We argue that it cannot really be maintained that the observer’s visual experience remains its initial red over the course of the transition. Instead, a series of subthreshold changes must be changing the observer’s conscious visual perception (Linton 2017, p.102, p.3189).

Note that this is a different point from Lamme (2003, ’s and Block (2007)’s argument that sudden (masked) ‘change blindness’ is not in fact blindness, but merely ‘inattentional inaccessibility’. Their argument rests on there being a failure of attention in the masked (sudden) ‘change blindness’ case. But gradual change blindness (sub-threshold failures of detection) are not due to failures of attention. As O’Regan (2011) notes, ‘ “you” may even be looking directly at the thing that is changing and still not discover it.’ Instead, ours is the very different point that detection thresholds in signal detection theory provide us with no justification for claiming that sub-threshold stimuli are not consciously experienced.

The same logic applies to the insistence that feedforward processing in V1 cannot be conscious because when backwards masking is applied to halt recurrent processing, such feedforward processing is undetectable. Lamme (2020) terms this ‘objective’ invisibility. But whilst Lamme (2020) suggests that sudden (masked) ‘change blindness’ (which he argues is consciously experienced) ‘is clearly different from invisibility from masking’, we have been given no reason, apart from behaviour, to conclude that backwards masking extinguishes vision in one context (V1 processing without recurrent processing), but merely working memory in the other (sudden change blindness).


Competing visual paradigms

Finally, Fahrenfort and Lamme (2012) and I disagree over what constitutes a good paradigm for visual processing, and therefore, over what is a good stimulus to test whether recurrent processing is necessary for visual processing. Fahrenfort and Lamme (2012) use three different types of illusions in their ‘no report’ paradigm: (i) pictorial size constancy in the Ponzo illusion, (ii) illusory contours in the Kanizsa triangle, and (iii) the checker shadow illusion. However, I disagree that any of these three illusions are really perceptual.


Pictorial size constancy in the Ponzo illusion

First, as we have already discussed above in the context of pictorial size constancy (see the discussion of in ‘Size constancy in pictures’), it is not at all clear that the apparent effect of perspective cues on perceived size is actually distorting visual space as opposed to merely our ability to make accurate judgements about visual space.


Illusory contours of the Kanizsa triangle

Second, whilst the illusory contours of the Kanizsa triangle are reliant on top-down processing from V2 (Qiu and Von Der Heydt 2005), we argue again (Linton 2017, p.11) that there is a little reason to suppose that these illusory contours are visually perceived. Indeed, how do they manifest themselves in our visual experience? It is sometimes suggested that the contours are seen as lighter than the surrounding. But there seems to be little evidence that this effect can cancel out an actual physical decrease in luminance of the contours, which would be required to show that this really is a perceptual effect.


Checker shadow illusion

The checker shadow illusion (Adelson 1995) is heavily reliant upon pictorial cues for its effect. Given our argument (in Linton 2017) that pictures and pictorial cues are merely cognitive in nature, we would also argue that such luminance constancy effects are also purely cognitive. The same thought applies to colour constancy, which explains why we do not find Block (1998)’s critique of V1 as the site of visual experience based on the land effect (colour constancy) determinative.


Random-dot stereogram

What, then, is an appropriate paradigm for thinking about visual perception? This is the topic of the recent debate between myself and Morales, Bax, & Firestone (Morales et al. 2020; Linton 2021a; Morales et al. 2021; Morales and Firestone 2021). Morales et al. (2020) are concerned with everyday viewing conditions and suggest that visual perception provides us with both the ‘distal stimulus’ (representation of physical 3D world) and the ‘proximal stimulus’ (representation of the retinal image). There is a long tradition of equating one eye vision with the retinal image (‘local signs’: Lotze 1846; Hering 1879; 19th century optometry: Atchison 1979; Johnson et al. 2011), which formed the basis of early investigations into the retinotopic nature of V1 (Inouye 1909). And since I argue that pictorial cues are merely cognitive, I am very sympathetic with the idea that monocular vision is just our retinal image. In Linton (2017), Ch.4 I explored the possibility that defocus blur might import some monocular depth (following Zannoli et al. 2016), but I am now inclined to think blur is merely a pictorial depth cue, and so all monocular vision is flat in Sacks (2006)’s sense.

However, the argument in Linton (2021a) is that ordinary vision with two eyes doesn’t provide us with our retinal image, nor does it provide us with a representation of the physical world. Instead, what matters is how the visual system resolves binocular disparity (the differences in the retinal images of the two eyes) to give us a single coherent percept. I therefore suggest that viewing a random-dot stereogram in complete darkness and isolation is the appropriate paradigm through which to begin to understand vision. In this regard, I appeal to an older tradition (that was dominant in the 1960s-80s) of ‘basic’ or ‘early’ vision (Julesz 1960, Bishop and Pettigrew 1986; Papathomas et al. 1995).

What are the basic components of seeing a random-dot stereogram? You might think it has two components. First, its distance. Second, its shape. But we have argued that its distance is not visually conveyed to us above in ‘V1 as a Cognitive Distance Map’. So all that is left is the perception of 3D shape with its visual scale being ambiguous (what I call ‘phenomenal geometry without scale’ in Linton 2017).

Turning to 3D shape, and consistent with my suggestion that vision is ‘silent’, I don’t believe stereo vision is a process of trying to estimate the scene geometry of the world from the different view points of the two eyes. Indeed, trying to do this would be meaningless without the vergence signal (Wallach and Zuckerman 1963), which is exactly what we have illustrated the visual system does not have. Instead, I think the most plausible explanation for stereo depth is that it is the solution to a very different problem that has nothing to do with 3D shape. And that problem is binocular rivalry. The percept we see in is the only percept we could see if we are to eradicate binocular rivalry. So on this account depth from disparity is not about 3D shape, but merely the eradication of binocular rivalry (Linton, in prep). 3D depth is the solution to a problem, not a problem to be solved itself. Specifically, there are no inferences about the 3D geometry of the scene involved.

Strictly speaking I do not think we should even talk about perceiving 3D shape or 3D geometry, as opposed to simply 3D depth (which is merely the resolution of rivalry). Take the following random-dot stereogram from Linton (2021a). The process of rivalry resolution I am describing is the process of locating each individual point in depth. This is the same process whether the points make up a single surface (as they do here) or are completely unrelated (as they would be in a random-dot field). That we interpret the points in as making up a single surface seems to be a cognitive inference based on Gestalt groupings. But all our visual experience conveys to us is individual dots located in a 3D space.


Motion perception

One criticism of this approach is that it focuses on static binocular vision. Surely motion perception is perceptual, and that involves areas beyond V1 like middle temporal visual area (MT). However, we argue that motion perception is purely cognitive.

First, the fact that the ‘double drift’ motion illusion relies on the PFC is taken as evidence that motion perception, and therefore perception in general, supports a higher-level theory of visual consciousness (Liu et al. 2019). However, the illusion does not affect saccadic eye movements (Lisi and Cavanagh 2015; cf.). Either our eye movements don’t act on what we see or, as we argue instead, eye movements provide a more immediate gauge of our visual experience, divorced from the cognitive biases that illusions introduce to the perceptual judgements and more deliberative actions tested by Lisi and Cavanagh (2017) and Liu et al. (2019).

Second, motion perception is really just the integration of extinguished percepts over time. In Linton (2017), pp.58–61, we ask why this process is presumed to be perceptual rather than cognitive? For instance, we see apparent motion between two dots blinking one after the other (‘beta motion’; Boeykens et al. 2020). But take one of these dots blinking in isolation. It is not at all clear that the judgement that the dot is ‘blinking’—which relies heavily on working memory to integrate percepts over time—is perceptual rather than cognitive. But if that’s true of one single dot blinking, why should not it be true of motion between the two dots?

Third, blindsight often claims to be a perceptual judgement, without visual experience, that something is moving in the visual field (Barbur et al. 1994; Zeki and Ffytche 1998; Azzopardi and Hock 2011). Whether blindsight exists in this sense or is merely degraded visual experience, continues to be debated (Azzopardi and Cowey 1997; Overgaard et al. 2008; Weiskrantz 2009; Phillips 2020). But the idea that motion perception is merely cognitive remains a distinct possibility here, and if so, may provide insights for ‘normal’ motion perception.


Objections

Finally, let us turn to four potential objections reviewers have raised with my account.


Is this a theory of visual consciousness?

Whilst Section 3 provides a theory of the neural correlates of visual consciousness, the argument is that Section 4 is not yet a theory of visual consciousness because it doesn’t ‘explain why’. First, it does not explain why we experience visual consciousness (the ‘hard problem’ is unresolved; Chalmers 1995). Second, it does not explain why we experience cognitive phenomenology in some contexts (e.g. reading) but not in others. In reply, I would argue that consciousness science today is very much akin to astronomy in the 17th century. It is important to remember that there were accounts that ‘explained why’ the planets moved based on magnetism (Gilbert 1600) and vortices (Descartes 1644). But we made progress by embracing a theory that did not attempt to ‘explain why’ (Newton 1687: ‘I feign no hypothesis’), even though this failure to ‘explain why’ left Newton open to the objection (from Leibniz in Clarke 1717), that this rendered planetary motion ‘inexplicable, unintelligible, precarious, groundless, and unexampled.’


What is pure visual consciousness without cognition?

I try to address this with my discussion of random-dot stereograms viewed in isolation and in darkness. With single eye viewing, there is nothing to suggest that we experience anything different from our retina image. What we see is flat. We know this because if we introduce a second identical retinal image from the other eye (zero disparity), our visual experience will not change, and zero disparity stimuli are flat (I think it’s helpful to think of single eye viewing as akin to zero disparity viewing). The random-dot surface is some indeterminate extension away from us, but I argue that it would be a category mistake to attribute any physical distance to this phenomenal extension:

“When we watch a movie, the movie is always at the same fixed phenomenal depth: the screen never appears to move towards us or away from us. And yet the fact that the movie is always at the same fixed phenomenal depth in no way impedes our enjoyment of the film: the movie can transition from wide-panning shots of a cityscape to close-ups of a face without this transition being jarring. Attributing a variety of different scales to scenes viewed at a single fixed phenomenal depth is therefore something that seems natural to humans.” (Linton 2018e)

The difference between monocular (one eye) and binocular (two eye) viewing is the sense of depth we perceive with two eyes, which is experienced in a random-dot stereogram when there is disparity (a difference in the retinal images). But this, I argue, is simply the outcome of the visual system resolving binocular rivalry. It moves visual points in depth (off the focal plane) so that they do not rival each other anymore. There is no inference involved.


How do we determine whether an effect is perceptual or cognitive?

For any other potentially perceptual process, it is an empirical question whether it is really perceptual or cognitive. We have to ask two questions.

First, how does the process affect our visual experience? For the Kanizsa triangle the illusory contours are said to look brighter. For the Müller–Lyer illusion, lines are meant to look longer/shorter. For vergence, objects are meant to look smaller and closer. The key point being that you have to be able to point to something in our visual experience that changes. It cannot just be ‘a feeling’ [see my disagreement with Knotts et al. 2020 in ‘Perception/cognition distinction’ above]. This is why I resist the suggestion that reading is perceptual. What changes in our visual experience?

Second, to test whether any apparent change in our visual experience really is a change in our visual experience, you need to devise an experiment that shows that this effect persists where a purely cognitive effect would not. With vergence I showed that this was not the case by retesting vergence as a size and distance cue whilst removing any subjective knowledge about the change in vergence and showing that changes in vergence had no effect on our visual experience.


Visual consciousness in the absence of V1

Silvanto et al. (2007) and Koivisto et al. (2010) document how neural plasticity can give rise to visual experience when V1 is no longer intact. Does this indicate that V1 is not actually necessary for visual experience? In a literal sense, yes. But I would make two points.

First, Ajina et al. (2015) illustrate that when V5/MT+ provides the basis for visual experience in these patients, it does not represent ‘ordinary’ V5/MT+ functioning, but instead appears to take on the functions of the missing V1. And, as we saw above, it appears that V1 itself can be recruited for other modalities with extended visual deprivation. How the brain can change a neuron from one experience to another (in the case of V1 recruitment) is essentially as puzzling as the hard problem itself (why any neuron should give rise to experience, and just as importantly, that specific experience). But I think what this literature shows is just how flexible the brain is at allocating functions, as opposed to saying that the functions associated with V1 feedforward processing cannot give rise to visual experience.

Second, the fact that feedforward processing from LGN to V5/MT+ gives rise to visual experience (Ajina and Bridge 2018), in much the same way that feedforward processing from LGN to V1 does, is actually supportive of my account, since there seems to be little prospect of the recurrent processing necessary for recurrent processing accounts.


Conclusion

One approach to visual neuroscience is to take a perceptual phenomenon that is already relatively well understood and to try and find the neural basis for it. But another approach is to take a neural mechanism that is already well explored and to argue for a new interpretation of it. For instance, Rao and Ballard (1999)’s initial argument for predictive coding rested on a reinterpretation of surround suppression found by Hubel and Wiesel (1965) (see Keller and Mrsic-Flogel 2018). In this paper, we take two neural mechanisms that have been relatively well explored over the last three decades, the extraction of the distance from vergence and the scaling of the retinal image using vergence, and argue for a reinterpretation of these basic visual functions as cognitive instead of perceptual. Given the interaction betweenvergence and multisensory integration in the Taylor illusion, as well as failures of mandatory fusion in multisensory integration, I extend this account to multisensory integration as well. We argue that the finding that such basic functions as the processing of size and distance in V1 is cognitive should have significant implications for our understanding of V1, not just as an egocentric cognitive map, but also as the site of a low-level theory of visual consciousness.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data for Linton (2020) is available at https://osf.io/2xuwn/ and data for Linton (2021b) is available at https://osf.io/5nwaz/.


Of maps and grids

Matteo Grasso, Andrew M Haun, Giulio Tononi — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8452603, CC BY 4.0.

Neuroscience has made remarkable advances in accounting for how the brain performs its various functions. Consciousness, too, is usually approached in functional terms: the goal is to understand how the brain represents information, accesses that information, and acts on it. While useful for prediction, this functional, information-processing approach leaves out the subjective structure of experience: it does not account for how experience feels. Here, we consider a simple model of how a “grid-like” network meant to resemble posterior cortical areas can represent spatial information and act on it to perform a simple “fixation” function. Using standard neuroscience tools, we show how the model represents topographically the retinal position of a stimulus and triggers eye muscles to fixate or follow it. Encoding, decoding, and tuning functions of model units illustrate the working of the model in a way that fully explains what the model does. However, these functional properties have nothing to say about the fact that a human fixating a stimulus would also “see” it—experience it at a location in space. Using the tools of Integrated Information Theory, we then show how the subjective properties of experienced space—its extendedness—can be accounted for in objective, neuroscientific terms by the “cause-effect structure” specified by the grid-like cortical area. By contrast, a “map-like” network without lateral connections, meant to resemble a pretectal circuit, is functionally equivalent to the grid-like system with respect to representation, action, and fixation but cannot account for the phenomenal properties of space.


Introduction

Imagine looking straight at a dark screen. A bright dot appears to the right, and you turn your eyes so that now it appears at the center of the visual field. When we study the brain as neuroscientists, we would like to fully explain how the position of the dot is represented in the brain, how the brain acts to move the eyes such that the bright dot is brought to the center of the retina, and, more generally, how the brain can perform this “fixation” function. This is in fact such a basic function that we have by now a good understanding of how many of its components are implemented. We know how the position of visual stimuli is represented in various brain areas across the occipital and parietal cortices (Wandell and Winawer 2011); we know that the frontal eye fields and other neural circuits control the eyes and that these circuits together can accomplish fixation and pursuit (Krauzlis et al. 2017). And we can describe what happens in terms of encoding, decoding, “information processing” (Kriegeskorte 2015), and, when appropriate, “predictive processing” (Hohwy 2013; Friston 2019).

But we also know that when we look at the bright spot on the dark screen, we actually “see” it, and we see it located first at the right and then in the center of visual space. This part we do not understand. How is it that the representation of the position of the dot over the screen, the action of the eyes, and the fixation function they implement to change the representation are accompanied by us “seeing” the dot in space? This part is not function but phenomenology (subjectivity, experience, consciousness, or words to that effect), and unlike function, we do not know how to account for phenomenology in objective, physical terms, which is what neuroscience deals with.

In this paper, we argue that it is possible to provide an objective, neuroscientific account of what it takes for phenomenology to accompany function; in this case, the phenomenal properties of spatial experiences accompanying a fixation function. What needs to be done is to provide a neuroscientific account of what spatial experience is like, not just of what we do with it. We also show that it is possible to dissociate function from phenomenology. A brain constituted of maps connected to each other to perform sensory-motor transformations can perform a function such as fixation without being accompanied by phenomenology. A brain constituted of grids rather than maps, simply by the addition of lateral connections, is functionally equivalent to a map brain in its ability to fixate and follow a target just as well. However, unlike a map brain, a grid brain can account for the key phenomenal properties that compose the structure of spatial experiences. We must be grids, not maps.


Methods


Networks

Our study is focused on two similar systems, one built around a grid and the other around a map. Both grid and map systems are constituted of probabilistic binary-state units in three layers: a receptor layer of seven units (the “retina,” abcdefg) that feed into the brain, a middle layer of seven self-connected units (the “brain,” ABCDEFG), and a motor layer of four motor units that get inputs from the brain (the “muscles,” hijk). The two systems differ only in the internal connectivity of the middle layer. In the first system, the middle layer is a grid: each of its units gets input from itself and from a single receptor, and is connected to other units in the same layer by weak nearest-neighbor lateral connections. In the other system, the middle layer is a map: each of its units gets input from itself and from a single receptor, effectively mapping the receptor array but with no further within-layer interactions.

The brains of these simple systems are meant to be reminiscent—of course in a merely schematic manner—of different parts of the visual brain that play important roles in the representation of visual space and the control of eye movements. The grid is like visual cortical areas, which conserve retinal topology but also have dense intra-areal connectivity, including lateral connections between similar cell types (Stettler et al. 2002). The map is more like the pretectal nuclei, such as the nucleus of the optic tract, which also conserve retinal topology but have little or no connectivity between their principal neurons (Gamlin 2006). The wiring of the two systems is shown in.

Each grid or map unit has a strong self-connection weight of w = 1, and each has a weaker input from its retinal receptor with weight w = 0.4. Grid units have inputs from their nearest linear neighbor or neighbors with weight w = 0.075. A grid or map unit passes the sum of its inputs through a compressive nonlinearity (Albrecht and Hamilton 1982), which gives the probability of the unit being ON in the next time step (t + 1): $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}\begin{equation*}P\left({{S_{i,t + 1}} \to ON} \right) = {{{{\left({\mathop \sum \nolimits_j {w_{i,j}}{S_{j,t}}} \right)}^n}} \over {{z^n} + {{\left({\mathop \sum \nolimits_j {w_{i,j}}{S_{j,t}}} \right)}^n}}}\end{equation*}\end{document} $$ $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}\begin{equation*}P\left({{S_{i,t + 1}} \to OFF} \right) = 1 - p\left({{S_{i,t + 1}} \to ON} \right)\end{equation*}\end{document} $$

The parameter z = 0.63 is the input level at which the unit has a probability of 0.5 to be ON in the next time step; n = 5 sets the steepness of the nonlinearity. The muscle units are noiseless OR gates, turning ON if any of their input units is ON. The retina units are perfect receptors: a retina unit always activates when intersecting a stimulus ray and is inactive otherwise (the activation of each type of unit is shown in).


Implementation

We implemented the grid and map systems in an action-perception loop, where the muscles can change the position of the retina with respect to an external stimulus. The receptors are enclosed in an eye with a small aperture directed toward a stimulus domain. Each receptor is a bin with width = 1, and each abuts its neighbors with no space between. The muscles pull leftward or rightward, moving the eye and changing the direction of the aperture. When a muscle is activated, the eye is not immediately pulled with full strength; instead, the full muscle strength is approached exponentially, and the eye moves gradually. The instantaneous velocity of the eye in the next time step is Vt+Δt, which depends on the eye’s velocity at time t, the maximum velocity mMt, and the time constant τ. $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}\begin{equation*}{V_{t + \Delta t}} = {V_t} + {{m{M_t} - {V_t}} \over \tau }\end{equation*}\end{document} $$

Mt is the sum of muscle states at time t (where an active Left muscle adds −1, an active Right muscle adds +1, and inactive muscles add 0). The parameter m determines how fast the eye can move (mM is the asymptotic velocity for muscle state M) and was set at m = 0.075; the time constant τ controls how long it takes the eye to reach the asymptotic velocity and was set at τ = 10. The eye’s velocity at time t determines the change in position S over the unit time step (Δt = 1): $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}\begin{equation*}{S_{t + \Delta t}} = {S_t} - {V_t}*\Delta t\end{equation*}\end{document} $$


Function

When we study a system as neuroscientists, we are interested in studying how systems represent stimuli coming from the environment and how they act based on their inner workings. Here, we employ several approaches typical of neuroscience. We analyze how systems represent and encode information about the input (and how such information can be decoded from internal states of the system), how they act, and, more generally, the functions they perform.

In, the system (it does not matter whether grid or map) fixates a blank region on a video display: a bright dot appears off to one side and the system moves its eye to fixate the dot. As this overt behavior plays out, the system’s brain goes through a series of state changes that are measurable using various neuroscientific tools. Studying the system’s behavior or its neural states can address two aspects of the system: what it does and what it represents.


What the systems do

When the stimulus domain is “dark” and the grid or map is inactive, the muscles are also inactive, and the eye does not move. When a stimulus (a “bright dot,” for example) is presented to the system and falls on a receptor, that receptor is immediately activated. It typically takes a few time steps for a grid/map unit to be activated by an active input. When it is active, a grid/map unit activates its target muscles. If the grid activity is only to one side of the central unit D (i.e. only in units ABC or only in units EFG), the muscle state is imbalanced, and the eye is pulled in one direction more than in the other so that it shifts toward the stimulus. If the grid activity is balanced around the central unit (or if only the central unit is active), then the muscle state is balanced, and the eye does not move: the eye has fixated the stimulus.

compares the fixation behavior of the grid and map systems. A stationary point stimulus is placed at the far edge of the eye’s field of view (just on the outside edge of receptor “a”). Each system moves so as to center the stimulus on receptor “d.” Both systems typically fixate the target within 50 time steps, and both are comparably variable in their performance (the variability coming from the noisy mechanisms of the grid/map). The eye moves gradually because just as it takes time for the receptors to evoke activity in the grid/map (due to the low strength of the input connection), it also takes time for grid/map units to become inactive once their receptor inputs are silent (due to the strong self-connections of the grid/map units). If the eye moved more quickly, it would be driven excessively by internal activity traces, would overshoot targets, and would rarely achieve fixation. Nevertheless, both grid and map system are nimble enough to follow a moving target as long as its speed averages less than a receptor’s width per time step.


What the systems represent

In the human brain, aspects of visual space are represented in the spatial organization of neurons in visual cortex. The receptive fields of cortical neurons tile the area of the retina so that the surface of the visual cortex preserves the ordering of points on the retina: this is known as retinotopy (Engel et al. 1997). Retinotopy can be demonstrated by stimulating different points on the retina and observing which neurons are activated by the stimulus. We can do the same with our system, stimulating each receptor and examining what happens to each grid or map unit. shows the results of such an experiment: we simulated an fMRI-style retinotopy experiment, in which a point stimulus slowly drifts across the system’s field of view. Both systems respond similarly. For both systems, the topographic mapping is clear: each receptor in the retina activates one unit in the grid or map. Apart from the topographic mapping, both systems are very similar both in how they encode stimulus position and in how they can be used to decode stimulus position. By any definition, both systems represent the space of the model retina. If we assume that the retina is exposed to an outside world with enduring spatial structure, both systems can be construed as representing that world’s spatial structure.


How the systems function

We can also assess the systems in terms of their input/output (i/o) functions (Doerig et al. 2019). In our case, this means characterizing the system’s output (muscle) states as a function of a range of input (receptor) states. shows the i/o characteristic of the grid and map systems as the probability of each possible muscle (muscle-layer) state given a particular one-receptor-ON input state. The probabilities were obtained by running 10 000 iterations of a “moving target” simulation, in which the stimulus point wanders randomly across the stimulus domain, for 200 time steps each.

The i/o characteristics of grid and map are extremely similar, qualitatively and quantitatively (the functions are correlated with ρ = 0.9715). This is due to the fact that they map their inputs in a similar way and to the fact that the grid and the map project in exactly the same way to the muscle layer. The i/o characteristic of each system can also be inverted so that each output state is associated with a certain “tuning function” on the input domain (i.e. the probability of input unit activity given some output state). The tuning functions are virtually identical for both systems. Only five of the seven possible tuning functions are selective. Judging from the system’s i/o characteristic, one might conclude that this system only represents five overlapping spatial positions.

Minor differences in the i/o functions between the two systems are due to a “modulatory” role of lateral connections in the grid system. Due to the facilitatory influence of lateral connections, grid units are activated by retinal inputs a little faster than map units. Conversely, grid units are slower to deactivate once their input has deactivated, since they may now have an ON neighbor that sustains their activity. Nevertheless, the grid and map system fixate with roughly the same speed and accuracy (For the purpose of this work, the map and grid systems have been built to be functionally equivalent. However, as pointed out by one anonymous reviewer, the subcortical and cortical pathways mentioned above likely have different functional properties reflecting a trade-off between propagation/reaction speed and information integration). Altogether, the two systems are functionally equivalent: they represent stimuli, act on them, and perform the same i/o function, ultimately fixating and following targets in very similar ways.


Phenomenology


The phenomenal structure of space

The standard tools of neuroscience let us fully account for the functioning of the grid and map systems in objective, physical terms. At the end of the analysis, we fully understand how both systems work—how they represent retinotopic spatial positions, how they bring about appropriate eye movements, how their units are tuned, and how the two systems can perform the fixation function. The human brain, of course, is immensely more complicated. However, an account along the lines of the one just provided would seem adequate for explaining how our visual system can perform a function such as fixation. A larger number of neurons and areas will be involved, but the principles do not change.

However, such an account leaves completely unexplained how, as human subjects, we not only have the ability to fixate the bright dot but also experience it as a particular region of space at its particular location, first at the periphery and then at the center of an extended visual field. Can we provide a neuroscientific, objective account of the phenomenal, subjective properties of our experience of space—of the extendedness of the visual field, with all its regions and locations?

Integrated Information Theory (IIT; Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016) has the explicit goal of accounting for the phenomenal properties of experience in physical, causal terms. The initial focus has been on the essential properties of consciousness—those that are true of every conceivable experience. More recently, the tools of IIT have been employed to address the properties of specific experiences, beginning with those of spatial experience (Haun and Tononi 2019).

Briefly, IIT begins by considering the fundamental phenomenal properties of spatial experiences—those that make space feel like an extended canvas. Introspection and reasoning indicate that the phenomenal structure of space is composed of a large number of phenomenal distinctions or “spots” bound by an even larger number of relations among them. Specifically, any spot overlaps itself (reflexivity); for any given spot, we can always find a spot partially overlapping it such that their intersection is also a spot (connection); we can find a spot partially overlapping it such that their union is also a spot (fusion); and we can find a spot that includes it or is included by it (inclusion) (Haun and Tononi 2019). These four phenomenal properties are what makes the experience of space feel “extended.” Other properties of spatial experience, such as regions, locations, sizes, boundaries, and distances can be derived from these fundamental properties. The next step is to account for these subjective, phenomenal properties in objective, neuroscientific terms, just as we do for functional properties.


Cause-effect structures: unfolding the causal powers of a system

According to IIT, to achieve this goal, we need to establish not just what a physical substrate can do—how it performs its functions—but what it “is”—what its full causal powers are at a given moment. The tools of IIT can be employed to fully unfold the causal powers of a substrate such as a network of neurons, some active and some not, by systematically manipulating and observing each subset of the network’s units. Doing so yields its “cause-effect structure,” which expresses the irreducible causes and effects of every mechanism of the system (causal “distinctions”) as well as the causes and effects they specify jointly (causal “relations”). To qualify as a physical substrate of consciousness, the cause-effect structure specified by a neural system must satisfy the essential phenomenal properties of experience in physical terms. Its cause-effect power must be intrinsic (within the system), structured (composed of causal distinctions and relations), specific (specifying particular cause and effect states), unitary (irreducible to causally independent subsystems), and definite (having a border and grain). If these essential properties are satisfied, the particular cause-effect structure specified by the system in its current state should account in full for the particular phenomenal structure of its current experience (Tononi 2015).

In the case of the grid system, the unfolding procedure reveals that the middle layer—the grid itself—satisfies the essential requirements for supporting experience as a single entity. In any system state, the grid specifies a single cause-effect structure (indicated by the dashed outline of the cause-effect structure in) composed of 79 causal distinctions and a large number of causal relations, a few of which are suggested in.

For example, there are seven first-order distinctions, specified by each individual unit with a cause and an effect over itself (due to the self-connection). There are 11 second-order distinctions, specified by pairs of nearby units over themselves or their mutual neighbors (e.g. AB, AC, BC, BD, CD, … FG). These distinctions are irreducible because, due to lateral connections, pairs of nearby units share inputs and outputs. By contrast, pairs of distant units (say, AD, AE, … AG) do not share inputs and outputs and their causes and effects are reducible to independent subsets. The remaining higher-order distinctions, all the way up to ABCDEFG, obey a similar pattern. Causal relations correspond to the irreducible overlaps among causes and effects specified by the 79 distinctions.

Unlike the grid, the map is not a single, irreducible entity. The unfolding procedure reveals that, due to the lack of lateral connections, the map breaks down into seven causally independent units, each specifying a single, first-order distinction over itself (indicated by the seven dashed outlines). From an extrinsic, functional perspective, the grid and map systems may appear fundamentally similar—they represent, act, and function similarly. But from an intrinsic, causal perspective, they could not be more different. The grid, it turns out, is a single, irreducible entity that specifies a rich cause-effect structure; the map, by contrast, is not an entity but an aggregate that reduces to seven mini-entities, each specifying a minimal cause-effect structure.


The correspondence of phenomenal and cause-effect structures

According to IIT, the particular phenomenal properties of an experience supported by a physical substrate in a particular state should correspond one-to-one to the particular cause-effect structure it specifies (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016). As previously shown (Haun and Tononi 2019), the cause-effect structure specified by a grid-like system can in fact account for the specific properties that characterize the experience of spatial extendedness—the fundamental properties of reflexivity, connection, fusion, and inclusion and derived properties such as regions, locations, and distances.

For the cause-effect structure specified by the grid system, some of these properties are represented schematically in. The correspondence between the subjective properties that characterize phenomenal extendedness and the objective properties that characterize extendedness in physical, causal terms is shown in. Every causal distinction overlaps with itself in the sense that its cause overlaps with its effect (reflexivity); for every distinction, one can always find another distinction that partially overlaps it such that their intersection is also a distinction (connection); a distinction that partially overlaps it such that their union is also a distinction (fusion); and a distinction that includes it or is included by it. None of this applies to the map system given that, due to a lack of lateral connections, it does not even specify a single cause-effect structure. To support extendedness, connections must be organized in a grid-like manner. For example, a network with as many units and connections as the grid system, but organized at random, fails to satisfy reflexivity, connection, fusion, and inclusion (Haun and Tononi 2019).

Of course, the cause-effect structure specified by a 1D, 7-unit grid is minimal, compared to what we might expect to be the cause-effect structure specified by the stack of 2D cortical areas in the human visual cortex, constituted of hundreds of millions of neurons. Nevertheless, an account along the lines of the one just provided would seem adequate, in principle rather than in degree, to explain the fundamental structural properties of phenomenal space (see also Haun and Tononi (2019) for a 2D example).


Conclusions

The simple networks analyzed here represent the position of a stimulus and act on its representation to fixate it. The systems’ functions can be fully explained by examining the tuning functions of their units, how they encode stimulus positions (which can be decoded from their activity patterns), and how they activate ocular muscles. This holds whether a system is as simple as these networks or as complex as the human brain and whether it can merely follow and fixate a stimulus or recognize and report the identity of a face in a crowd. Many assume that a full functional explanation of what a system does, and how it does it, exhausts what we should and can hope to understand in objective, neuroscientific terms [we discuss this point in detail in a companion paper (Ellia et al. 2021)].

However, even when we merely fixate a stimulus, regardless of any functional response, we also “see” it, and we see it located in space, first at the periphery and then at the center of the visual field. To account for the fact that space feels extended and that stimuli appear at their experienced location within space, we cannot just rely on a functional account. Instead, we need to account for the phenomenal structure of spatial experience. As illustrated here, phenomenal properties can be accounted for in objective, neuroscientific terms just as much as functional properties. To achieve this goal, however, we must assess what a system “is”—its causal powers at a given moment—rather than what a system “does”.

Drawing on IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016) and its application to the problem of spatial experience (Haun and Tononi 2019), we have shown how the causal powers of a substrate can be characterized in full by unfolding its cause-effect structure. Doing so reveals that a grid-like substrate constituted of units linked by lateral connections specifies a cause-effect structure whose causal distinctions and relations can account for the phenomenal distinctions and relations that characterize the experience of space. The fundamental phenomenal relations of reflexivity, connection, fusion, and inclusion among spots—and the derived properties of regions, locations, sizes, boundaries, and distances, which compose the phenomenal structure of subjective space—find an objective correspondent in the causal properties of cause-effect structures specified by grid-like substrates.

We have also shown that a map-like substrate—one that lacks lateral connections—can fixate just as well as a grid-like substrate—it is functionally equivalent to it (or nearly so). However, unfolding a map does not even yield a single cause-effect structure, let alone one that is spatially organized. It follows that while the map network is functionally equivalent to the grid network, it is not phenomenally equivalent to it—there “cannot be” any phenomenology for a map, let alone spatial phenomenology.

An intriguing prediction that follows directly from the dissociation of function and phenomenology concerns the scrambling of input and output connections. For both the grid and map systems described here, if the connections between receptors and central units were scrambled, and those between central units and eye muscles were scrambled in a compensatory manner, there would be hardly any functional consequence. However, for the grid network, the scrambling would result in a major phenomenal change: a dot stimulus moving across the retina would not be experienced first at the far right, then closer and closer to the center, but would appear sequentially at random locations in space.

Elementary as they are, the grid and map networks illustrated here were meant to be reminiscent of certain neural substrates in the human brain. A majority of areas in posterior cortex are organized like stacks of grids. Clinical and experimental evidence from lesion, stimulation, and recording studies indicates that these grid-like cortical areas do in fact support the experience of space (Pollen 1999). For instance, damage to the occipito-parietal lobe of one side results in the loss of a large portion of space not just in perception but also in imagination (Butter et al. 1997). In other words, subjects are not just blind to stimuli presented contralaterally to the lesion but are unaware of the very existence of that part of the visual field—in fact, they are often unaware that anything is missing (Townend et al. 2007). By contrast, it is generally thought that subcortical visual pathways, such as those running through pretectal nuclei, mediate reflex functions that remain unconscious (Martin 2020). Indeed, damage to these circuits results in various functional deficits (Keane 1990) but has only indirect effects on visual experience. However, it is usually not explained why posterior cortical areas would support the experience of space as well as govern functions such as the smooth pursuit of a visual target, whereas pretectal circuits may implement similar functions (and interact with cortical circuits) without contributing to experience. Perhaps, as proposed here, it may come down to grids versus maps.


Implicit–explicit gradient of nondual awareness or consciousness as such

Zoran Josipovic — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8500298, CC BY 4.0.

Consciousness is multi-dimensional but is most often portrayed with a two-dimensional (2D) map that has global levels or states on one axis and phenomenal contents on the other. On this map, awareness is conflated either with general alertness or with phenomenal content. This contributes to ongoing difficulties in the scientific understanding of consciousness. Previously, I have proposed that consciousness as such or nondual awareness—a basic non-conceptual, non-propositional awareness in itself free of subject-object fragmentation—is a unique kind that cannot be adequately specified by this 2D map of states and contents. Here, I propose an implicit–explicit gradient of nondual awareness to be added as the z-axis to the existing 2D map of consciousness. This gradient informs about the degree to which nondual awareness is manifest in any experience, independent of the specifics of global state or local content. Alternatively, within the multi-dimensional state space model of consciousness, nondual awareness can be specified by several vectors, each representing one of its properties. In the first part, I outline nondual awareness or consciousness as such in terms of its phenomenal description, its function and its neural correlates. In the second part, I explore the implicit–explicit gradient of nondual awareness and how including it as an additional axis clarifies certain features of everyday dualistic experiences and is especially relevant for understanding the unitary and nondual experiences accessed via different contemplative methods, mind-altering substances or spontaneously.

Keywords: nondual awareness, consciousness as such, neural correlates of consciousness, meditation, consciousness


Introduction


Relevance of consciousness as such and its gradient

Consciousness as such has been a perennial concern of the nondual contemplative traditions for many centuries (Radhakrishnan and Moore 1967; Rabjam 2007). Recently, this topic has gained increased traction in both neuroscience and philosophy of mind. It has been suggested that a number of current impasses in understanding consciousness could benefit from including consciousness as such in research and theorizing (Koch et al. 2016; Josipovic 2019; Michel et al. 2019; Metzinger 2020; Baars 2021; Lepauvre and Melloni 2021).

The present discussion will first outline what consciousness as such is and then propose that the implicit–explicit gradient of consciousness as such can be added as the third dimension to the standard two-dimensional (2D) map of consciousness. This gradient informs about the degree to which consciousness as such is manifest in any experience, independent of the specifics of global state or local content. I will also explore how including this gradient clarifies certain features of everyday dualistic experiences and may be especially relevant for understanding the unitary and nondual experiences accessed via different contemplative methods, mind-altering substances or spontaneously.

Consciousness as such or nondual awareness will be discussed from its phenomenal, functional and neural levels. Other levels, such as ontological, metaphysical, ethical or soteriological, although no less important, will not be discussed here. The nondual view presented here sees consciousness and the brain as being like two sides of a coin, the same in being one and different in not being reducible to one another, with the indeterminate unknowing substrate akin to seeing the coin from its side in terms of probabilities only. Phenomenal descriptions of how nondual awareness appears in experience ground the present discourse. Functions of nondual awareness are discussed in terms of its role in experience and in terms of differentiating it from global states and local contents and from attention or monitoring with which it is frequently conflated. The neural level is discussed in terms of networks in the brain and their global organization.


Terms and caveats to be read before proceeding

A caution about language is needed before proceeding. Language is linear, dualistic and temporal, with a subject-object structure, while consciousness as such is experienced as nondual, wholistic and atemporal, so discourse on this topic can easily appear circular and paradoxical, like attempting to describe a three-dimensional (3D) sphere using a one-dimensional line.

A frequent source of misunderstandings comes from the way this topic is presented. In order to point to what consciousness as such is, it first needs to be emphasized how it is different from states, contents and functions. Likewise, certain methods developed to enable one to recognize it, rely on separating and isolating consciousness as such from all other content. But then, it also needs to be pointed out that it can co-occur with any state and content. This can lead either to a mistaken impression that all content must cease for consciousness as such to be explicitly present or to conflating consciousness as such with changes in contents and states (Josipovic and Miskovic 2020; Metzinger 2020).

A number of terms commonly used in contemporary discourse on consciousness can have different meanings when applied to consciousness as such. Below, I list a few such terms and define how they will be used here.


Consciousness, awareness and consciousness as such

Consciousness refers here to conscious experience as a whole, which includes phenomenal, access, self-consciousness, etc. (Block 2007; Lau and Rosenthal 2011). Conscious experience can be said to have two aspects: the modified consciousness consisting of contents, functions, states and the indeterminate substrate, and the unmodified consciousness or consciousness as such (Rabjam 2007; Josipovic 2019). The terms modified and unmodified have been adopted from Samkhya philosophy but are here used only as pointers, without any ontological or metaphysical implications (Radhakrishnan and Moore 1967). The term awareness is not used here in the ordinary sense, as an awareness of a specific stimulus or awareness as general alertness (Laureys and Tononi 2011). Rather, it is used only for consciousness as such, unless indicated otherwise by the context. summarizes this.


Consciousness as such or nondual awareness

The terms consciousness as such and nondual awareness are used interchangeably and stand for the unmodified aspect of conscious experience in itself, a basic non-conceptual nondual awareness, irrespective of the level of arousal or amount of content that may co-occur with it. This is unlike some theories where the term consciousness as such refers only to awareness isolated from all other content (Metzinger 2020). Such awareness is experienced as that which is, and has always been, conscious in all experiences. In other words, as consciousness itself or consciousness as such. However, whether this is true in an ontological sense is not known and although highly significant will not be addressed here.

Note that on this view, consciousness as such is first and foremost an awareness and not merely an indeterminate unknowing substrate, as in some models (Srinivasan 2020). The substrate only covers or obscures consciousness as such (for further details, see the section ‘How is nondual awareness obscured from itself?’). To avoid conflating the two, I will refer to consciousness as such as nondual awareness wherever possible.

Unless stated otherwise, the present discussion pertains only to conscious experience. What makes a specific state or content conscious or unconscious will not be addressed here. The gradient of nondual awareness discussed here is for the most part orthogonal to conscious–unconscious dichotomy, although, as we will see later, its axis intersects with axes for global state and local content at their mutual zero point. The terms global state, alertness and arousal are used here interchangeably (for disambiguation, see Metzinger 2020).


Reflexivity, self-knowing, self-recognition and self-awareness

The term reflexivity as ordinarily used implies a conceptual meta-cognition and re-representation (Rosenthal 2012; Peters 2015). Here, however, it is used to refer to the inherent non-conceptual reflexivity of consciousness as such, awareness knowing itself to be aware non-transitively, as its property. This non-representational reflexivity has also been termed self-knowing and its activation a self-recognition (Kshemaraja and Singh 1990; Rabjam 2007). Such awareness is then termed the self-knowing awareness or self-awareness for short (Higgins 2011). This is different from how these terms are ordinarily used in psychology and neuroscience where they refer to knowledge, recognition or awareness of one’s self.


Representation and non-representation

Representation here refers only to conceptual mental representations or concepts for short, such as categorization, schema and various semantic, iconic and numeric symbols (Hubbard 2007; Shea, 2018). Conceptual categorization refers to categorization by labeling, as opposed to non-conceptual categorization by segregation or exclusion (Lamme 2020; Thompson 2021). The term non-representational or non-conceptual in this sense means not relying on such concepts, symbols or propositional beliefs. Debates between direct non-representational and indirect representational realism are outside of the scope of this discussion. Whether consciousness as such is entirely non-representational or only less representational remains an open question (Chalmers 2004; Zahidi 2014). On the view presented here, both non-representational and representational knowing are not only possible but necessary.

Importantly, the term representation does not here refer to neural representation, which will be termed neural correlate for disambiguation (Yuste 2015).


Duality and nonduality

Duality refers here to structuring of experience and knowing in terms of subject–object dichotomy. It also refers, more broadly, to the fragmentation of experience into conceptually reified polarities such as self–other, us–them, good–bad, internal–external and mind–body (Guenther 1984; Josipovic 2014). Nonduality then primarily refers to experiencing and knowing without such dualities. However, the term has also been used differently in other contexts, for example, to refer to an absence of phenomenal content in meditative absorption or to an absence of self-specifying process (Dor-Ziderman et al. 2016; Srinivasan 2020). In the present discourse, nonduality refers to how consciousness as such knows and abides with phenomenal contents and conscious states it co-occurs with. At an even deeper level, nonduality refers to the fully explicit nondual awareness appearing as simultaneously transcendent and immanent in contents and states that co-occur with it (Rabjam 2001; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).


Organization of the manuscript

For the sake of clarity and brevity, this discussion is organized in a top-down manner, emphasizing theoretical implications over empirical details of first-person accounts and neuroscience studies. However, ideas presented here are not merely normative. Phenomenal descriptions come from texts of various traditions, which form a body of evidence about centuries of experiences with various contemplative practices, and from increasingly large numbers of contemporary practitioners of meditation worldwide (Rabjam 2001; Maharshi 2006; Metzinger 2020). In addition, neuroscience studies of meditation, especially when paired with newly developing methods of assessing participants’ experience, have significantly increased our understanding of consciousness during contemplative and altered states (Tang et al. 2015; Petitmengin et al. 2019; Van Lente and Hogan 2020).


Consciousness as such—nondual awareness


What is it?

A currently popular view sees the brain as a computer-like device that lives in the dark about the body and the external environment, separated from them by the skull, and that the only way it can know them is by creating virtual, representation-based models and comparing their predictions with representations of inputs to minimize prediction errors (Seth 2015; Chalmers 2017). However, the brain is an integral part of the body, and so, it also knows the body and the external environment in a much more direct and intimate way, as its own lived reality, in which the internal and external environments are one unified, direct, non-representational experiencing or being (Varela et al. 1993; Thompson and Cosmelli 2011). It has been proposed that this more direct way of knowing may be instituted in living organisms via some type of resonance mechanism (Hunt and Schooler 2019; Levin 2021).

Consciousness as such is then a type of knowing, a basic non-conceptual, non-propositional awareness, without dualistic structuring of experience into conceptually reified subject and object. Hence, it has been termed nondual awareness (Rabjam 2001; Higgins 2011; Josipovic 2013, Dunne 2015; Laish 2015; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021).

Progressively deeper levels of meditation can reveal more subtle, ordinarily unconscious layers of conceptual mentation, so that at some point even the basic propositional beliefs and category concepts that specify subject and objects can cease, and yet a basic nondual awareness can still remain, vividly present and knowing (Lama 2004; MacKenzie 2015; Metzinger 2020). Granted, it is still possible that some entirely inaccessible unconscious conceptual processes, similar to those that construct ordinary cognitions, also underlie the phenomenal non-conceptuality of nondual awareness. In other words that only upper-level concepts and symbols cease but that deeper level conceptual and propositional processes remain the same. However, the absence of key properties of ordinary conceptual cognition and meta-cognition such as categorizing, memory associations, semantic tagging and especially the pervasive dualistic subject-object structuring makes it unlikely that nondual awareness is, in itself, a similar conceptual process as ordinary dualistic cognition (Higgins 2011; Thompson 2021). This is challenging because instances of completely isolated nondual awareness are relatively rare, and nondual awareness most often co-occurs with some amount of ordinary dualistic conceptual processes.

Although this awareness is ordinarily only implicit in experience, it can under certain circumstances become explicit. When explicitly present, it knows itself inherently to be aware and as the aware space within which conscious states and contents occur (Rabjam 2001; Josipovic 2019).


Non-conceptual reflexivity

The key property of consciousness as such or nondual awareness is its inherent capacity to know that it knows, that is, to be aware and know that it is aware, without mediation by concepts, propositions, or semantic, iconic or numeric symbols (Rabjam 2007). This direct non-conceptual reflexivity is inherent in consciousness as such as its property and is non-transitive, without subject-object structure (Higgins 2011; Laish 2015; MacKenzie 2015; Fasching 2021). In nondual contemplative traditions, it has also been termed self-knowing, self-recognition or self-awareness and more recently as non-representational reflexivity (Ksemaraja and Singh 1990; Rabjam 2001; Josipovic 2019). This property makes nondual awareness phenomenally and functionally unique. In other words, consciousness as such is unique because it is precisely just that which knows and knows that it knows, directly, as what it is. It could then be said that, unless an organism or a system can, in principle, be reflexively aware in this way, it is not conscious in the same way that we humans are (for a more detailed discussion, see Josipovic 2019).

The inherent reflexivity of nondual awareness can become activated so that awareness recognizes itself and becomes explicit in experience with varying amounts of phenomenal content. For example, this self-recognition can occur when nondual awareness is isolated from other content during minimal or minimized phenomenal experience, such as instances of attaining lucidity during deep, non-REM (NREM) sleep. It can also occur with full phenomenal content during ordinary wakefulness or in altered states (Laish 2015; Dunne et al. 2019; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020; Metzinger 2020).

When nondual awareness becomes explicit during minimal phenomenal experience as in full meditative absorption, it appears as an open, empty cognizance, aware and present, but without any thoughts, emotions or perceptions, without a sense of body, orientation, time or the usual sense of self (Thompson 2014; Josipovic 2019; Metzinger 2020). Alternatively, various amounts and types of reduced content can be present during absorption states, with nondual awareness explicitly manifest (Metzinger 2020; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).

When nondual awareness is fully explicit during wakefulness, it is experienced as simultaneously transcendent and immanent in conscious states and contents. It is transcendent, as the silent aware space that pervades and encompasses the entire conscious experience, one’s entire perceptual bubble; and also, immanent, as that out of which everything is made, the way water in a glass is both the medium in which ice cubes float and the substance out of which they are made (Radhakrishnan and Moore 1967; Rabjam 2001; Josipovic 2019).


Dimensions or properties of nondual awareness

When nondual awareness is explicitly present, a number of its properties or dimensions can be self-evident. In the Asian nondual contemplative traditions, these have been usually stated as three or four but more can be differentiated depending on various criteria and interests (Rabjam 2007; Higgins 2011, Josipovic 2019; Metzinger 2020; Fasching 2021). They can be summarized in a list as:

Being or presence—the obvious fact of awareness being present or phenomenally existing.

Emptiness—an absence of conceptually assigned identity and conceptualizations about itself or phenomena that reify awareness as the subject and phenomena as objects essentially separate from it.

Nonduality—a corollary of the above, without subject–object structuring of experience.

Luminosity or radiance—a cognitive property appearing as the clear transparent light by which it knows itself and phenomena present to it.

Non-conceptual reflexivity—a corollary of the above, refers to nondual awareness inherently knowing itself to be aware without relying on mediation by conceptual mental representations.

Bliss—silent contentment of being entirely complete in itself, with no sense of any lack or any need for anything outside of itself, so in this sense, without intention.

Singularity or unity—nondual awareness is singular and homogenous, a unity of all its dimensions, not compounded or constructed from them or from anything else.

No self/self—without a constructed self, but the self-same awareness in all experiences, hence also termed the self.

Boundless, timeless spaciousness—single aware space, in itself without edges or boundaries, the background context of any experience, pervading and encompassing both internal and external environments, without a psychological sense of time.

Ecstatic pleasure—near orgasmic-like enjoyment of contact between nondual awareness and phenomena, beyond pleasure–pain dichotomy. Although specific pleasures and pains occur and are experienced as such, the underlying nature of experiencing is an ecstatic union of nondual awareness and any perceptual, affective or cognitive content.


Functions of nondual awareness

In terms of its function, nondual awareness has been compared to a mirror, while phenomena that appear to it have been compared to reflections in the mirror (Norbu 2013). Its manner of knowing phenomena can be described as mere reflecting or registering, without categorization or further conceptual elaboration, i.e., without labeling, associating, evaluating, forming decisions or taking itself as a reified subject that knows phenomena as reified objects (for a detailed discussion and disambiguation from bare non-conceptuality, see Thompson 2021). Thus, nondual awareness is neither the reflective nor the pre-reflective consciousness as usually understood, neither slow nor fast thinking, as these are based on conceptual processes and on implicit subject–object duality (Zahavi 1998; Kahneman 2011; Thompson 2021).

Furthermore, just as a single mirror reflects all of the images of objects present in front of it, the effect of this singular awareness is to further unify various elements of conscious experience (Rabjam 2001; Blackstone 2007). This corresponds to a major function of nondual awareness in unifying intrinsic self-related and extrinsic environment-related aspects of experience (Josipovic et al. 2012). In this sense, nondual awareness, when explicitly present, functions as the conscious space in which experience occurs (Rabjam 2001; Josipovic 2019). Not the conceptualized schematic space of distances, routes or boundaries, but the single non-conceptual space encompassing the entire perceptual bubble of any nondual conscious experience, pervading the internal and external environments at the same time (Rabjam 2001; Blackstone 2007; Josipovic 2014). In such experiences, nondual awareness also functions to relax the habit of sorting experience into acceptable and unacceptable parts (Guenther 1984; Josipovic 2013).


Neural correlates of nondual awareness

It is possible that nondual awareness is phenomenally and functionally unique but not neurally unique and that its neural correlates are the same as those for attention or arousal or their predictive models (Raffone and Srinivasan 2010; Webb and Graziano 2015; Metzinger 2020; for further details, see Josipovic 2019). Be that as it may, I will here present a view, as I have done in the past, according to which nondual awareness is also neurally unique (Josipovic et al. 2012; Josipovic 2014).

A neural correlate of nondual awareness needs to be able to function with both low and high levels of arousal and content and also serve as the integrative conscious space within which contents occur. A parieto-frontal cortico-cortical and thalamo-cortical network with a self-sustaining oscillatory resonant dynamic regime could perform such a function (Baars et al. 2013; Koch et al. 2016; LaBerge and Kasevich 2017; Heeger and Mackey 2019; Mashour et al. 2020). The central precuneus network fulfills these criteria for the neural correlate of nondual awareness (Josipovic 2014). This functional network links the central precuneus with the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC, BA 9/10/46), the dorsal anterior cingulate and dorso-medial prefrontal cortex (dACC and dmPFC, BA32, BA8), and the inferior parietal lobe and temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), consisting of the angular gyrus (r/l-Ang), supramarginal gyrus and the caudal superior temporal gyrus (Cavanna and Trimble 2006; Margulies et al. 2009; Cunningham et al. 2017; Buckner and DiNicola 2019).

The central precuneus is one of four or five functionally distinct areas of the precuneus, others being dorsal-anterior for somato-motor processing, dorsal-posterior for visuo-spatial, ventral posterior for autobiographic self and episodic memory, and the central for cognitive associative processes (Margulies et al. 2009). Further functional specialization may exist between left and right precuneus (Cavanna and Trimble 2006; Fingelkurts et al. 2020). The ventral precuneus, together with the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and retro-splenial cortex, is a part of the intrinsic system for processing self-related content, better known as the default mode network (DMN) (Fox et al. 2005; Buckner and DiNicola 2019). Recent studies have proposed that the ventral precuneus also has functional subdivisions, with the rostral ventral belonging to DMN proper and the caudal ventral belonging to the parietal episodic memory network (Zheng et al. 2020). The two dorsal precuneus areas, the anterior rostral and the posterior caudal, are not parts of the DMN; rather, they are related to the extrinsic system whose spontaneous resting-state activity is usually anti-correlated with that of DMN (Margulies et al. 2009).

Studies reporting activations and connectivity of the medial parietal lobe frequently conflate these four areas of the precuneus with each other or even the precuneus as a whole with the PCC (Brewer et al. 2011; Berkovich-Ohana et al. 2020). This blurring of functional differences also happens due to methodological reasons, such as when PCC is used to define DMN and spatial smoothing is applied in preprocessing (Margulies et al. 2009).

The central precuneus, located dorsally to the ventral precuneus, between the anterior rostral and posterior caudal dorsal areas, is unique among different subdivisions of the precuneus. It can adaptively associate with either DMN or the task-positive networks such as dorsal attention network (DAN) or the fronto-parietal network (FPN) for cognitive control (Li et al. 2019). This diversity functionally differentiates the central precuneus. While the ventral areas of precuneus link selectively to PCC and DMN, the anterior and posterior dorsal areas link selectively to left or right (FPN). Only the central precuneus can functionally connect with all of the networks, both the intrinsic and the extrinsic (Li et al. 2019). This corresponds to a major function of nondual awareness in increasing the integration of intrinsic self-related and extrinsic environment-related aspects of experience (Josipovic et al. 2012; Josipovic 2014). Note that, at this level, there is only one awareness, which can encompass either or both intrinsic and extrinsic contents. Since nondual awareness is the conscious space within which nondual experiencing occurs, its most likely neural correlate is the central precuneus and its network (Josipovic 2014).

When nondual awareness is explicit during normal wakefulness and its inherent self-knowing is vividly present, the prefrontal nodes of this network, dlPFC in particular, function to add the necessary amplitude and persistence to the network-wide resonance and coherence (Helfrich and Knight 2016; Schmidt et al. 2018). From the perspective of modular computational processing, this can be stated as the working memory maintaining the awareness-space online but without relying on representing or re-representing it via semantic, iconic, numeric or other concepts. At the same time, there will be a decrease of activity and connectivity between the central precuneus and angular gyrus of the right TPJ, reflecting the relaxation of conceptually reified body boundaries (Josipovic 2014; Blanke et al. 2015). When nondual awareness is isolated from other phenomenal content and abiding in its ground state, the activity of the central precuneus network may shift toward its posterior nodes (Ferrarelli et al. 2013; Josipovic 2019; Raccah et al. 2021).

According to the view presented here, the subcortical areas of brain stem and thalamus, including the reticular activating system and its cingulo-opercular projections, are necessary for the proper functioning of the central precuneus network, but they are not by themselves sufficient for nondual awareness. If they were, then all humans and even most mammals would be experiencing awareness that knows itself to be aware inherently. The fact, however, is that activating this direct self-knowing of awareness is challenging for most humans and in all likelihood impossible for animals.

The central precuneus network can be modeled as a macro-circuit or a neural net with extensive recurrent connections, which enable it to enter into sustained oscillatory resonance regimes following repeated ignitions (Buzsaki 2006; Moutard et al. 2015; Phillips et al. 2016; Heeger and Mackey 2019; Mashour et al. 2020). Such a network could be causally closed enough for awareness to perpetuate itself, given that the necessary level of arousal is maintained. The initial self-recognition of nondual awareness and its subsequent ongoing reflexive self-knowing correspond then to the network ignition and to subsequent stabilizing of the oscillatory resonance (Josipovic 2014). When nondual awareness is an ongoing presence, the central precuneus network will rest in its baseline, which is a tonic state of self-sustained oscillatory resonance stabilized in a sub-threshold low-power mode (Roach et al. 2018; Heeger and Mackey 2019).

In respect to nondual awareness, the main purpose of this organization is to enable the network to inform itself, and by extension the rest of the brain, about its state regarding its availability to process information, which, on this account, would be experienced as an empty cognizance or awareness that knows itself to be aware, and, at the same time, is open to knowing any information presented to it from the internal and external environments (Josipovic 2014). From this perspective, nondual awareness is a broadcast of the system’s current ground state, or in the language of the global workspace theory, the broadcast of its own broadcasting capacity (Baars et al. 2013; Ricard and Singer 2017).

When nondual awareness is explicitly present in the foreground of experience, the central precuneus network functions as the dynamic core of such global broadcast, which will also include local networks for contents that co-occur with it. When nondual awareness is implicit, the reduced activity of the whole network or the fragmented activity of its nodes are added to the broadcast as frames (Baars et al. 2013; Josipovic 2014, Godwin et al. 2015).

Of course, a neural network informing itself about its capacity to process information can be instituted in a relatively simple electronic circuit, without any sign of awareness or consciousness, so the biological constraints on a system’s capacity for consciousness apply here and so much more for nondual awareness that requires a human-level brain (Cook et al. 2014; Dehaene et al. 2017; Koch 2019).


Differentiating nondual awareness from states and contents

The mirror metaphor can be also used to illustrate how nondual awareness is different from global states and local contents, provided we keep in mind that it is only a metaphor and not a mechanistic explanation. In respect to the global state, the level of arousal and alertness can be compared to the amount of illumination in the room, so that some minimum amount is necessary for the mirror to reflect anything, but aside from that, changing the level of illumination affects only how images appear in the mirror and not the mirror itself (Josipovic 2016). Examples of dissociation between awareness and global state are the instances of nondual awareness becoming explicit during lucidity in rapid eye-movement (REM) dreaming, or in deep, NREM sleep (Thompson 2014; Voss et al. 2014) and the near-death experiences (Martial et al. 2020). In those states, awareness can be present with low levels of arousal. Conversely, there are vegetative states of nonresponsive wakefulness without awareness (Boly et al. 2012). Awareness can also be present in hypomanic states of high arousal, such as those induced by psychedelics (Millière et al. 2018). In principle, nondual awareness can become explicit in all and any of these global states. Conversely, all those levels of arousal can and do occur without nondual awareness ever being realized. In other words, global state and its related arousal level do not specify nondual awareness.

Nondual awareness can also be differentiated from local contents. It can be present independent of the amount of content, with a large amount of content during full normal wakefulness or with a minimal content as in lucidity during NREM sleep (Josipovic and Miskovic 2020; Metzinger 2020). To regard isolated nondual awareness primarily as a minimal phenomenal experience, rather than as a unique kind, means that it is still seen as a content of sorts rather than that which is aware of content (Josipovic 2019). Treating awareness and content as differentiable has been accused of leading to the dead end of Cartesian dualism (Dainton 2002). However, this objection does not apply here because nondual awareness is inherently without subject–object structuring and abides non-dually with content (Rabjam 2001).


How is nondual awareness obscured from itself?

At the most superficial level, what impedes self-recognition of nondual awareness is a simple ignorance, not knowing that there is such an aspect to human consciousness or that it can wake up to itself. Paradoxically, once the conceptual knowledge about nondual awareness is acquired, it can itself become an obstacle if one becomes too attached to it. It then interferes with one’s ability to be open to a more direct, non-conceptual experiencing and knowing (Rabjam 2007).

Nondual awareness is phenomenally the most subtle aspect of human consciousness, consciousness as such, and since normal conscious experiencing ordinarily operates at a much coarser level of conceptually solidified subject and objects, nondual awareness can be difficult to detect (Guenther 1984; Blackstone 2007). The attentional habit of focusing exclusively on perceptual, affective or cognitive contents, rather than also on that which is aware of such contents, also contributes to keeping nondual awareness implicit only.

Nondual awareness is also the most intimate aspect of experience—who one is as a conscious, aware presence in all one’s experiences—so that the ways in which one is defensively distancing from one’s authenticity contribute to it remaining hidden and implicit. The non-preferential, all-encompassing mode of knowing and experiencing that characterizes nondual awareness can trigger psychological defenses that keep unacceptable and threatening aspects of one’s experience from one’s conscious self, so that, at a subconscious level, allowing nondual awareness to become explicit may be experienced as threatening (Blackstone 2007; Lindahl et al. 2017).

Nondual contemplative traditions point to an even deeper level, at which nondual awareness is obscured from itself by the unconscious indeterminate substrate, or store-house consciousness, which is thought to function as a container for storing memories, akin to the psychodynamic notion of the unconscious (Germano and Waldron 2006; Higgins 2019). In itself, the substrate consists of three types of mistaken, usually unconscious, cognitions: first, a conceptual categorizing and reifying of nondual awareness as essentially separate from the rest of experience; second, the dimming of awareness’ cognitive luminosity so that nondual awareness fails to recognize itself; and third, mistaking such dimmed awareness for a conceptually reified subject and phenomena for reified objects (Rabjam 2007; Higgins 2019). Patterns of organizing experience along this dualistic subject–object polarity, from basic propositional beliefs and categorizations to elaborate self-world models, become stored and used as predictions, in other words, projected onto current experience (Wallace 2007; Josipovic 2016; Higgins 2019). The unconscious identification with the dualistic self-world model perpetuates this process (Metzinger 2010). Until nondual awareness self-recognizes, this substrate underlies and dualistically structures both conscious and unconscious states and contents, so that, e.g., attaining lucidity in REM or NREM sleep, does not automatically constitute the self-recognition of nondual awareness (for further discussion see, Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).

Nondual awareness and the substrate have been traditionally compared to the sun and clouds, respectively (Rangdrol 1990). A cloud covering can entirely obscure the sun, yet the sun is still present, and its light illuminates all on the ground below. While not visible, the sun can only be inferred on the basis of its light. As the clouds disperse, the sun is revealed, but it is not the case that clouds created or became the sun, much as the unconscious substrate only obscures consciousness as such, and does not create it or become it (Rangdrol 1990; Rabjam 2007; Higgins 2019).

The substrate has been referred to as the ignorance i.e. without beginning but that can have an end (Rabjam 2007). Normal development does not result in nondual awareness becoming spontaneously explicit. This holds true even in children who may have had some unitary or spiritual experiences early on. Rare exceptions are known to happen and then only in the late teens or early adulthood (Ray 1986; Maharshi 2000). In light of contemporary neuroscience, this can be understood as being due to the late myelination of long-range axonal connections between nodes of the central precuneus network (Miller et al. 2012; Huntenburg et al. 2018). However, once developed, this network still needs to be turned on or ignited for nondual awareness to be manifest explicitly (Josipovic 2019).


The implicit–explicit gradient of nondual awareness or consciousness as such

The gradient of nondual awareness informs about and maps how nondual awareness appears in any experience, independent from the global state and local content of that experience. In that sense, the gradient is related to temporary states, rather than to enduring traits. On the view that nondual awareness is self-same and unchanging, the gradient represents the degree to which the substrate obscures nondual awareness. In other words, the gradient represents how self-recognized the awareness is.

The most commonly used map of consciousness decomposes consciousness into two dimensions: the global state or level that indicates a degree of alertness on one axis, and the local content indicating a degree of vividness and richness or amount of perceptual, affective or cognitive content (Laureys and Tononi 2011). Since consciousness as such, as discussed above, is in principle dissociable from states and contents, it cannot be adequately specified with this standard 2D map. Instead, its implicit–explicit gradient needs to be added on the z-axis.

This gradient can be thought of as having three main zones or clusters, implicit, transitional and explicit, which are both discrete and continuous. Below I outline how a selection of experiences, both ordinary dualistic, and more unitary and nondual, can be understood in light of the implicit–explicit gradient and its map.


Implicit zone of the gradient

In the first zone of the gradient, nondual awareness is present only implicitly. When nondual awareness is implicit, it is obscured from itself by the substrate’s mistaken cognitions and misidentifications as conceptually reified subject and object (Germano and Waldron 2006; Higgins 2011; Metzinger 2020). Its direct non-conceptual knowing becomes obscured by the indirect conceptual symbolic-based transitive thinking. The property of being-presence becomes obscured by the reified notion of existence and by grasping for it. The property of emptiness becomes obscured by the reified notion of nonexistence and by the fear of it. The property of bliss of being complete in itself becomes obscured by craving and reward-seeking (Guenther 1984; Rabjam 2007).

This organization of experience has been termed duality (Josipovic 2014; Dunne 2015). It fragments experience into opposing poles, such as mind vs. body, inside vs. outside, self vs. other, us vs. them, etc., which in traditional analysis cause pervasive unnecessary discontent and suffering (Dahl et al. 2015; Josipovic 2016). On this view, the more implicit nondual awareness is, the more dualistic and fragmented the experience is, or in the language of prediction theories, the more it becomes covered up by the self-world model and its predictions (Metzinger 2020; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021). A range of duality can be found both within healthy experience and within clinical conditions. When an experience is one of comfort and ease, there will be less dualistic fragmentation and the properties of nondual awareness, although still known only indirectly, will be more apparently reflected in experience. For example, being-presence will be reflected as peacefulness, awareness as an abatement of fixated beliefs, bliss as enjoyment and happiness, and singularity as authenticity and connectedness. When an experience is one of ongoing stress and struggle or when the survival mechanisms and ego-defenses are chronically overactive, the dualistic fragmentation will be more pronounced, and the nondual awareness and its qualities will usually be more obscured (Guenther 1984; Kohut 2009; LeDoux and Lau 2020). When nondual awareness is implicit only, locating an experience along its gradient cannot be determined directly. However, since the gradient represents a summation of different properties of nondual awareness, this can be estimated indirectly by assessing how much each property is reflected in an experience.

The more dualistic and fragmented an experience is, the less optimally integrated the global brain organization will be. This is most evident in clinical cases that show signatures of global disorganization, such as higher entropy and decreased functional segregation between resting-state networks, accompanied by the loss of their internal coherence (Sheffield and Barch 2016). On the other end of the disorder spectrum, global disorganization can be due to a hyper-synchronization, as in epileptic disorders (Kobayashi et al. 2017). Healthy conscious dualistic experiences, when nondual awareness is implicit, show the opposite signatures, a reduced entropy and more fixed attractor organization (Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019). For example, more distinctly defined attractors such as front vs. back, then, reflect the organization of experience into a conceptually constructed knower instituted in the PFC, which knows representations of objects in the posterior part of the brain. Similarly, a more rigid functional segregation of the resting-state networks can be found (Fox et al. 2005; Josipovic et al. 2012).

Given that the implicit zone of the gradient is characterized by nondual awareness not knowing itself directly, we can expect that this will be accompanied by a decrease in sustained oscillatory resonance and intra-network functional and effective connectivity in the central precuneus network, most significantly between the central precuneus and dlPFC.


Transitional zone of the gradient

The second zone of the gradient is the transitional zone. It has two sections. The first one, related to a variety of unitary experiences that reflect more of the properties of nondual awareness, but without nondual awareness directly recognizing itself. The second one, in which nondual awareness recognizes itself directly as that which is aware.


Transitional unitary experiences

On this view, unitary experiences such as those encountered although contemplative practice, psychedelics or spontaneously, are possible because nondual awareness is present in the background of all experiences, even when unrecognized (Josipovic 2010). When the endogenous or exogenous conditions cause the dualistic subject–object self-world model to temporarily relax or cease, commonly reported as ego dissolution (Yaden et al. 2017; Barrett and Griffiths 2018), properties of nondual awareness can become more clearly reflected in experiences, giving them, among other properties, their unitary character (Rabjam 2001).

Interestingly, the more subtle the content, the more clearly it can reflect the properties of nondual awareness. For example, a more subtle experience of internal and external energy can reflect the unity property more strongly than the coarser experience of solidity of the body and objects in the environment. Further along in subtlety, an actual—not merely imaginary—formless experience, such as that of infinite light, can reflect the properties of nondual awareness to a great degree and with relatively little distortion.

A variety of experiences in this range will have the neural signatures of their chief characteristics. For example, depending on the degree, ego dissolution will show decreased activation and connectivity of areas involved in self-specifying processes such as DMN or the subcortical areas of the core self (Dor-Ziderman et al. 2016; Metzinger 2020).

However, while subjects may report awareness as part of their unitary experiences, the common characteristic of all experiences in this group is that they do not yet include the direct self-recognition of nondual awareness by itself (Hanley et al. 2018, Josipovic 2019).


Transitional self-recognition

The second section of the transitional zone of the gradient is related to the initial awakening of nondual awareness to itself. This is the key aspect of the gradient, the activating of the self-knowing property of consciousness as such, its non-conceptual reflexivity.

A number of different factors can contribute to an optimal situation for the self-recognition to activate. Both traditional and contemporary accounts indicate that these can vary considerably between individuals and situational contexts (Rangdrol 1990; Maharshi 2000; Metzinger 2020). What actually causes the ignition of this auto-reflexivity is not known, other than it is a spontaneously occurring event and that some cognitive strategies, like attending to awareness, as in awareness-of-awareness practices, or questioning, as in self-inquiry practices, can facilitate it (Josipovic and Miskovic 2020; Maharshi 2006).

Two parallel cognitive processes co-occur as the direct non-conceptual reflexivity activates and self-recognition ignites: first, the conceptual processes that construct the multi-layered reified subject and objects temporarily relax or cease, so that awareness emerges and is present however briefly, relatively unobscured, but long enough to unglue itself from identification with the constructed self; and second, nondual awareness wakes up to itself and ‘sees its own face’, as traditionally expressed (Rabjam 2001). It becomes aware that it is aware directly and not via conceptualizations about itself (Ksemaraja and Singh 1990; Rabjam 2007; Laish 2015; Josipovic 2019).

Interestingly, the relation between these two cognitive processes is asymmetric. While the ignition of this intuitive leap is the sine-qua-non of self-recognition, the abatement of self-specifying mental representations and even of dualistic subject–object structuring is not. Paradoxically, nondual awareness’ knowing of itself can ignite even with the presence of dualistic subject–object conceptualizations, as Saraha famously stated:

the radiance of self-awareness in awareness and un-awareness…shines without removing the grime of subject and object.(Saraha, as quoted in Higgins 2006)

The neural correlates of the activation of the inherent reflexivity of awareness will be related to the ignition in the central-precuneus network and to establishing a more sustained oscillatory resonance and coherence, especially between the central precuneus and lateral PFC nodes of this network, as previously proposed (Josipovic 2014). In such instances, we can also expect to see a decrease in activation and connectivity of the areas of the medial temporal lobe that are involved in conceptual representations and schema-based predictions, together with an accompanying decrease in the involvement of the semantic network areas (Josipovic 2019; Metzinger 2020; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021; Thompson 2021).

Nondual awareness can appear to be intrinsic only as pure subjectivity or extrinsic only as empty of any self. However, in itself, nondual awareness is neither exclusively intrinsic nor extrinsic. Since it can pervade and encompass both types of content, either alone or together, it is transcendent to them, similarly to how space is transcendent to objects in it. In principle, neither an intrinsic content like introspection nor an extrinsic content like an absorbing perceptual experience are in and of themselves antithetical to nondual awareness self-recognizing and becoming explicit.


Explicit zone of the gradient

The explicit zone of the gradient is characterized by the self-knowing nondual awareness being fully in the foreground of experience. It has three sections.


Nondual awareness as transcendent

The first section is one of realizing the identity of nondual awareness and space, in which nondual awareness becomes established as the ongoing space-like context, and all states and contents irrespective of how they are constructed, are experienced within it, as within a metaphoric ground of being (Rabjam 2001; Blackstone 2007; Higgins 2011).


Nondual awareness as immanent

The second section of explicit zone of the gradient is one in which nondual awareness appears as immanent within contents and states, as that which they are made of, and all its properties are reflected clearly in them (Radhakrishnan and Moore 1967; Rangdrol 1990).


Nondual awareness as singularity

The third section of the explicit zone is that of unity, when nondual awareness appears as both the aware space in which conscious states and contents occur and as the substance out of which they are made, so it is experienced as simultaneously transcendent and immanent in experience (Josipovic 2016). At the full unity, both nondual awareness as the ground and all contents and states within it are a singular, spontaneously occurring authentic presence (Klein and Wangyal 2006).

Neural correlates of explicit nondual awareness will be seen in the effects of the central precuneus network on the global organization of the brain, in the increased functional integration of intrinsic and extrinsic networks and in the increase in left–right symmetry (Lutz et al. 2004; Josipovic et al. 2012; Johnson 2016). Akin to psychedelic states, explicit nondual awareness will exhibit global dynamic signatures of increased criticality, poised between too much disorganization and too much organization, and accompanied by the relaxation of more fixed attractor states, such as front vs. back ones (Millière et al. 2018; Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019).

Perception co-occurring with nondual awareness during normal wakefulness shows less top-down prediction, corresponding to subjects reporting less memory associations and conceptual interpretations tagging onto perceptions (Fucci et al. 2018; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021). Relaxation of different layers of conceptually constructed self, a common effect of many contemplative practices, occurs with nondual awareness as well, although attenuation of DMN may be less pronounced than in focused attention or open monitoring styles meditations, as nondual awareness can non-preferentially contextualize any type of content (Dahl et al. 2015; Dor-Ziderman et al. 2016; Josipovic 2016). On the level of body-based self, the relaxation of the reified representations of body boundary may be seen in decreased connectivity between the central precuneus and the angular gyrus in the right temporo-parietal area (Josipovic 2014; Blanke et al. 2015).


Discussion


Implicit–explicit gradient as z-axis

The most commonly used map decomposes consciousness into two dimensions: the global state or level that indicates a degree of alertness on one axis, and the local content indicating a degree of vividness and richness or amount of perceptual, affective or cognitive content (Laureys and Tononi 2011; Aru et al. 2019). Mapping consciousness in this way has been useful, especially in the field of neurology, but, as many have noted, rather incomplete (Overgaard and Overgaard 2010; Bayne et al. 2016). For example, features central to altered states of consciousness cannot be specified by a single dimension of level and require other dimensions (Bayne and Carter 2018; Millière et al. 2018). Contents too are better portrayed as a summation of a number of other dimensions or factors, such as subjective sense of specificity, vividness and intensity (Fazekas et al. 2020).

The standard 2D map of consciousness lacks the third dimension or z-axis. Various features of consciousness have been proposed as a possible z-axis, such as self and self-awareness (Hanoǧlu et al. 2014), subjective report of level or state (Bachmann 2012), and the connection with the external environment (Carhart-Harris et al. 2018). From the perspective presented here, the main issue with the 2D map is that it conflates consciousness as such or basic nondual awareness with global state and local content (Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).

Perhaps, the most accurate way of modeling nondual awareness would be as a multi-dimensional state-space, where its properties would be dimensions of the model. Each property could then be represented by a vector specifying its vividness, clarity, stability, etc. (Millière et al. 2018; Fazekas et al. 2020; Metzinger 2020). Such multi-dimensional state-space models better capture many of the nuances and complexities of consciousness (Berkovich-Ohana and Glicksohn 2014; Fazekas and Overgaard 2016).

However, the number of dimensions in such a model could increase rapidly, depending on one’s criteria for selecting them and how imaginative one may be in labeling them. This could easily lead to a considerable overlap between model’s vectors. Additionally, selecting and labeling a feature does not necessarily make it a genuine dimension of nondual awareness. Instead, it could be referencing a change in perceptual, affective and cognitive content or capacities, or in the level of arousal and alertness, that are occurring due to the presence of nondual awareness.

It has been proposed that each of the axes of the standard 2D map can be seen as a summation of various related dimensions of a multi-dimensional state-space model (Bayne et al. 2016). The z-axis, proposed here for a 3D map of consciousness, could similarly be seen as the summation vector of all of the dimensions of nondual awareness, represented as the implicit–explicit gradient that plots the degree to which nondual awareness is manifest in an experience.

A note of caution: Temptation needs to be resisted to take locations on the gradient too literally, as objectively existing levels, which one then thinks of as goals to attain, rather than as pointers indicating features of experience (Rabjam 2007). Both traditional and contemporary accounts of methods for realizing nondual awareness abound with descriptions of stages of progress, which can be understood in terms of trait acquisition, but are for the most part such pointers. When they are conceptually reified and affectively invested in, they can trap one on an endless treadmill of future goals to be attained in pursuit of some ideal of perfection—a special kind of hell.


Differentiating consciousness as such, from functions of consciousness

Nondual awareness can be confounded with functions of consciousness that co-occur with it. Differentiating it from some functions, like language or mental imagination, is relatively straightforward, since nondual awareness is non-conceptual and non-symbolic. Differentiating it from other functions, like voluntary and involuntary attention, working memory and meta-cognition, can be more challenging (Dunne 2015; Josipovic 2019). This is compounded by the fact that these functions are frequently employed in various contemplative methods used to arrive at nondual awareness (Josipovic 2010, Dunne 2015; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).

A key purpose of attention, whether voluntary or involuntary, is selection of content. In contrast, nondual awareness is choice-less or non-preferential in relation to content, akin to a mirror’s relationship with images reflected in it (Higgins 2011; Norbu 2013). Rather than preferentially selecting some content or its features as a foreground, nondual awareness encompasses an entire conscious experience equally. While being functionally different, attention and awareness overlap, so it can be difficult to differentiate them experimentally, as evidenced by efforts to disentangle consciousness as perceptual awareness from attention (Lamme 2004; Maier and Tsuchiya 2021).

Meditation methods that rely on attention cultivate focused attention and bare non-distractedness, both with and without an object of focus (Tsongkhapa 1996; Dunne 2015). These practices can often lead to absorption states with reduced levels of content. The shutting down of perceptual, affective and cognitive content is often confused with nondual awareness itself, but the resultant states of mental quiescence, non-distracted attention or even bare non-conceptuality are not in and of themselves nondual awareness or consciousness as such (Manjusrimitra and Lipman 2001; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020; Metzinger 2020). Neural correlates of such absorptions have been found in the global reduction of cortical activity and the slowing down of EEG signal frequencies (Berkovich-Ohana et al. 2015; Berman and Stevens 2015). Additionally, absorption in bare non-distractedness may be reported as an experience of isolated nondual awareness without content (Winter et al. 2020). The observed neural signatures of such a state are mainly in the areas of the DAN, indicating that rather than being a neural signature of pure nondual awareness itself, they most likely reflect the reliance on voluntary focused attention together with breath retention, to control and reduce the contents of one’s consciousness (Winter et al. 2020).

Monitoring and vigilance, which are, in addition to attention, also related to alertness and meta-cognition, are the primary functions employed in mindfulness meditation. Once a level of skill is reached that does not require effortful top-down control, the neural correlates of such monitoring have been found in the areas of the salience network and the related cingulo-opercular system for control of arousal and alertness (Lutz et al. 2008; Tang et al. 2015; Metzinger 2020). These areas have been proposed as the neural signature of pure awareness encountered in minimal phenomenal experience or absorption (Metzinger 2020). Most likely, they reflect the mechanisms for regulation of alertness rather than being the neural correlate of awareness itself (Sadaghiani and D’Esposito 2015). Finding of the anterior insula involvement in these instances can also be related to the method that involves tracking interoceptive signals, such as sensations of breath in the body (Farb et al. 2007). The global state can be changed by directly or indirectly manipulating the level of arousal in the brain, e.g., via stimulation of the basal forebrain, but given some minimal necessary arousal, nondual awareness is orthogonal to the level of arousal or alertness in the brain (Pal et al. 2020). Furthermore, in contrast to the integrative function of the central precuneus network, the salience network that includes the cingulo-opercular areas for the control of alertness is mainly involved in involuntary switching between the extrinsic and the intrinsic systems, thus contributing under normal conditions to their functional segregation (Menon and Uddin 2010). Interestingly, the central precuneus network has a shared node with the cingulo-opercular network in dACC (Margulies et al. 2009). Beyond this, differentiating nondual awareness and minimal phenomenal experience has been discussed extensively elsewhere and will not be repeated here (Josipovic 2019; Josipovic and Miskovic 2020).

Nondual awareness is also different from meta-awareness, a conceptual meta-cognition that one is aware. From a representational perspective, being aware that one is aware requires a re-representation of the higher-order representation of a first-order representation of being in a state of awareness (Rosenthal 2012). The necessity of such third-order re-representation seems like an obvious evidence that such conceptual processes are not the mechanism of nondual awareness, since the reflexivity of nondual awareness is, so to speak immediate, as its inherent property, and is non-conceptual and non-transitive, so phenomenally it is very different from attending as a subject to awareness as an object of one’s conceptual knowing (Rabjam 2007; Peters 2015; Josipovic 2019).

Some contemplative traditions train a non-propositional meta-awareness (Raffone and Srinivasan 2010; Dunne et al. 2019). This is still not consciousness as such, as the inherent self-knowing of nondual awareness is here intentionally inhibited in order to attend to qualities of one’s attention or to one’s perceptual and affective states (Dunne et al. 2019).

Unlike functioning of the working memory during conceptually based experience, during explicitly manifest nondual awareness, there is no intentional maintenance and manipulation of conceptual-symbolic representations of nondual awareness itself. However, to the extent that hippocampal–cortical associations are formed through any repeated experience, it is likely that some conceptual memory schemas related to nondual awareness and to events surrounding it will be formed and become triggered during a future occasion of nondual awareness. While nondual awareness itself is not a re-construct from memory, its presence does not interfere with memory functions. Thus, in practice, repeated experiences of nondual awareness are often a mix of actual nondual awareness and some constructed contents (Josipovic 2019; Metzinger 2020; Laukkonen and Slagter 2021). However, the global broadcast of nondual awareness does not require semantic tagging in working memory; in other words, the broadcast can include non-conceptual awareness and less conceptually constructed or even entirely non-conceptual content (Dehaene et al. 2017; Ricard and Singer 2017; Josipovic 2019).

According to predictive coding theories, much of what constitutes conscious experience are the outputs of various unconscious predictive models, such as those for interoception, attention or alertness (Seth 2015; Webb and Graziano 2015; Carhart-Harris and Friston 2019; Metzinger 2020). It then stands to reason that consciousness as such, as a basic non-conceptual nondual awareness, would have its own predictive model too. In other words, it may not be necessary to insist on specifying nondual awareness in terms of a predictive model of something other than itself. Furthermore, asking if a predictive model of awareness is alone sufficient for creating the experience of awareness is like asking if a higher-order thought alone is sufficient for a conscious experience of an object whose first-order representation it is re-representing (Brown et al. 2019). Even if it were, it would be merely virtual. In contrast, a major benefit of non-conceptual nondual awareness is in that it can free us from the matrix of a conceptually constructed virtual self and world.


Limitation and future directions

The present discussion is grounded in a phenomenal level of description, an approach that has its inherent advantages and disadvantages. Due to limitations of space, some topics were not explored. For example, the way each dimension, or property, of nondual awareness appears in experience can be explored further in terms of how it changes along the gradient. Neural correlates of those changes can be specified. In light of this, the gradient can be explored further by situating a wider variety of experiences along its axis. This may be especially relevant for spiritual and contemplative experiences.

Future studies could test the expected global dynamic signatures of explicit nondual awareness by comparing them when it is isolated from contents vs. when it is explicit with a normal level of content in wakefulness, or with a high level of content as in some psychedelic states. It would be also interesting to see how a measure of the implicit–explicit gradient correlates with the phi measure of integration (Koch et al. 2016).

Finally, even though this paper presents a key aspect of human consciousness, it does not address the hard problem of consciousness or how the ideas presented here relate to current theories of consciousness. These will be topics for future explorations.


Conclusion

Consciousness as such or nondual awareness is unique, and in trying to understand and research it, it should not be reduced to other aspects of consciousness, such as states and content or different functions or capacities. Including it into a research program on consciousness would help with current impasses in our understanding and lead to refinement of current theories or to new more encompassing theories of consciousness.

Mapping consciousness as such or nondual awareness onto the z-axis, as the gradient of how implicit or explicit it appears in experience, can add clarity to attempts to systematize unitary or mystical experiences. Various characteristics, which have been thought to give them their uniqueness, such as ego-dissolution or introvert–extrovert features, can now be further specified and related to how implicit or explicit nondual awareness is during an experience.


Conflict of interest statement

The author declares no conflict of interest.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

There is no experimental data for this study, because the study was theoretical only.


Apical amplification—a cellular mechanism of conscious perception?

Tomáš Marvan, Michal Polák, Talis Bachmann, William A Phillips — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8511476, CC BY 4.0.

We present a theoretical view of the cellular foundations for network-level processes involved in producing our conscious experience. Inputs to apical synapses in layer 1 of a large subset of neocortical cells are summed at an integration zone near the top of their apical trunk. These inputs come from diverse sources and provide a context within which the transmission of information abstracted from sensory input to their basal and perisomatic synapses can be amplified when relevant. We argue that apical amplification enables conscious perceptual experience and makes it more flexible, and thus more adaptive, by being sensitive to context. Apical amplification provides a possible mechanism for recurrent processing theory that avoids strong loops. It makes the broadcasting hypothesized by global neuronal workspace theories feasible while preserving the distinct contributions of the individual cells receiving the broadcast. It also provides mechanisms that contribute to the holistic aspects of integrated information theory. As apical amplification is highly dependent on cholinergic, aminergic, and other neuromodulators, it relates the specific contents of conscious experience to global mental states and to fluctuations in arousal when awake. We conclude that apical dendrites provide a cellular mechanism for the context-sensitive selective amplification that is a cardinal prerequisite of conscious perception.


Introduction

More than a decade ago, John Bickle announced the coming era of “molecular and cellular consciousness studies” (Bickle 2007, 291). Whereas mainstream cognitive neuroscience usually investigates consciousness at network and higher levels, cellular and molecular approaches to consciousness are concerned with processes within individual neurons. Although this low-level approach is not yet common in consciousness science (for notable recent exceptions, Flohr 2000; see Sevush 2016; Laberge and Kasevich 2007; Aru et al. 2020b), it has several strengths to recommend it. Cellular approaches to consciousness, and to cognition in general, build upon decades of successful neurobiological work and proceed by the highly effective methods of precise measurements and targeted interventions into the cellular processes.

In this article, we aim to contribute to this nascent and exciting field of study. Anesthesia (Suzuki and Larkum 2020), absence epilepsy (Cossart et al. 2001; Kole et al. 2007), and slow-wave sleep (Aru et al. 2020a) all prevent apical input to neocortical cells amplifying their output, so we consider the possibility that conscious experience when awake depends on apical amplification (AA). The theory of conscious perception presented here aims to explain how mechanisms within a particular class of pyramidal neurons, i.e. context-sensitive cells in layer 5B of the neocortex, provide cellular foundations for network-level processes that have long been thought to be neuronal correlates of perceptual experience. We start with a short overview of the mechanisms and then guide the reader through four distinctive features of the theory. The ways in which this article complements and advances beyond previous articles on the perspective that we advocate are listed in the “Concluding remarks” section.


The mechanism of AA

Cortical processing revolves around pyramidal neurons. Of special interest are context-sensitive cells with two points of integration as exemplified by a subset of layer 5B pyramidal neurons. These cells have two distinct zones of integration—the somatic integration zone and the apical integration zone, as shown in. Both zones initiate active regenerative voltage-dependent transmissions. For instance, the apical integration zone initiates calcium spikes and the somatic integration zone sodium action potentials.

The somatic integration zone of a layer 5B (L5B) pyramidal neuron receives inputs from basal dendrites that feed directly into the cell body. These inputs to the somatic integration zone operate as a chain of feedforward inputs from sensors such as the retina, via modality-specific first-order thalamic relay nuclei, such as the LGN, to primary sensory cortices, and then onward through hierarchies that extract progressively more abstract features from the information provided by the sensory input. The feedforward stimuli reaching the somatic integration zone in visual pyramidal neurons contain information about color, shape, contours, motion, surface, position in space, size, depth, and so on.

The long apical trunk of a pyramidal neuron can be divided into proximal, intermediate, and distal (tuft) segments. The apical integration zone resides in the distal upper part of the trunk oriented toward the surface of the cortex, in cortical layer 1. The elongated dendritic trunk allows for the coupling of the activity of its somatic zone (close to the neuron soma in the deeper cortical layer) and apical zone (in the upper cortical layer). With this kind of structural setup, the L5 pyramidal neuron enables the interaction between diverse contextual inputs to the apical dendrites in layer 1 and content-specific input to the somatic integration zone (Larkum et al. 2001).

The apical integration zone receives diverse feedback inputs from higher perceptual regions and from intralaminar and other “nonspecific” thalamic nuclei, top-down inputs from prefrontal cortical regions, and inputs from nuclei in the amygdala, from parahippocampal regions, and from neuromodulatory systems (Rockland and Pandya 1979; Cauller 1995; Diamond 1995; Rhodes and Llinás 2001; Larkum et al. 2004, Larkum 2013, Figure I in Box 1 at 143; Ramaswamy and Markram 2015; Stuart and Spruston 2015). The activity in the apical integration zone differs from that in the somatic integration zone in one crucial respect: its role in perception is to act as a modulator of the strength with which information abstracted from feedforward activity is transmitted. If the net input to the apical integration zone exceeds the calcium spike initiation threshold and the soma receives feedforward evidence for the perceptual features to which it is selectively sensitive, then those features are signaled to downstream sites more effectively. This modulation leading to more effective transmission of perceptual information coded in feedforward activity is called AA.

Direct intracellular recordings show that excitatory apical input that cannot by itself generate action potential output can, nevertheless, greatly affect the cell’s response to the feedforward inputs to its basal dendrites and soma (Larkum 2013; Major et al. 2013); these inputs specify the receptive field features to which the cell is selectively sensitive. When the net apical input is excitatory, the cell’s response to its preferred sensory feature is amplified. However, when the net input is inhibitory, due to specialized inhibitory interneurons targeting layer 1 apical tufts (SOM inhibitory interneurons), that response is attenuated. When these inhibitory interneurons are themselves inhibited by VIP inhibitory interneurons, then amplification is disinhibited. This amplifying or attenuating mode of apical function is typical of normal awake perception.

If the apical integration zone receives a backpropagated spike from the soma when it is also receiving excitation from tuft dendrites in layer 1, its threshold for initiating calcium spikes is significantly reduced. These calcium spikes, or plateaus, are actively transported to the soma via the apical trunk where they amplify response to the feedforward input by converting a single somatic action potential into a brief burst of two to four action potentials within about 20 ms. This process of backpropagation-activated calcium firing, although the most studied, is not the only intracellular process by which AA may occur (for a detailed review, see Section 2.3 of Phillips 2017).

Inputs to the apical integration zone specify a broad context within which the processing of feature-specific information by the somatic zone occurs. They impart relevant updates about bodily needs, emotional states, current tasks, learned cognitive expectations, and biases, as well as information from other streams of sensory processing, both within and between modalities. For what follows, it is important to note that inputs from all the various sources are summed at the apical integration zone to compute a single value, i.e. a postsynaptic potential at the apical integration zone. This value can in no way convey information about each of the many individual components that it sums. The information conveyed by that single value is the net bias toward either depolarizing (excitation) or hyperpolarizing (inhibition) the apical integration zone given all these diverse inputs.

In contrast to the role of AA in perception, cells in perceptual regions can also be activated during imagery experiences, hallucinations, and dreams. We assume that in these cases inputs from internal sources to the apical dendrites in layer 1 do generate an action potential output, a process referred to as “apical drive” (Aru et al. 2020a). As outputs from these cells are normally a response to sensory input, it is to be expected that imagery, hallucinations, and dreams will generate experiences that have much in common with veridical conscious perception.


AA and perceptual consciousness

The theory briefly reviewed in the previous section has the potential to explain four phenomena distinctive of conscious perception. In particular, the cellular mechanisms described may help to explain (i) how the cortically received sensory signals are amplified such that they become part of conscious experience, (ii) how the apical mechanism amplifies the perceptual information transmitted without corrupting it, (iii) how the local signals to be amplified are selected in the context of the organism’s current needs, goals, and emotions, as well as of the information extracted from other sensory inputs, and (iv) how the neuromodulatory mechanisms underlying the global states of consciousness and the mechanisms of selective conscious perception are intertwined at the cellular and molecular level. In this section, we will elaborate each of these points in more detail.


A cellular conscious-status awarding mechanism operates upon unconsciously computed perceptual contents

Perceptual contents are processed in dedicated sensory-perceptual areas of the cortex. Auditory contents are processed in primary and secondary auditory regions, perceptions of motion in the V5/MT area, areas tuned for face stimuli are found in occipital and temporal cortical areas (Chang and Tsao 2017; Nestor et al. 2020), and so forth. Stimulus-specific activity can be generated in these regions unconsciously, however. This activity may process perceptual inputs from the low-level features such as orientation or contrast up to higher levels involving object identities and categories or word meanings (Greenwald et al. 1996; Kinoshita and Lupker 2003; Boyer et al. 2005; Dehaene et al. 2006; Van Gaal and Lamme 2012; Stein et al. 2014; Francken et al. 2015; Dijksterhuis and Nordgren 2016; Song and Yao 2016; Hutchinson 2019; Koivisto and Neuvonen 2020; Lucero et al. 2020). Evidence indicating that contents of conscious experience can be processed unconsciously and preconsciously is rich and multifaceted. This evidence has been gathered with a variety of experimental paradigms (briefly reviewed in the).

Two empirical findings are crucial for our argument. First, stimuli of which we are not conscious engage (parts of) the same sensory areas as consciously experienced stimuli (Moutoussis and Zeki 2002; Van Vugt et al. 2018; Pojoga et al. 2020; Frith 2021). That is to say, a stimulus may activate a neural response in the appropriate part of a sensory cortex without eliciting its experience. Second, the unconscious activations are differently expressed; typically, the neural response to the same type of stimulus in the unconscious perceptual condition (as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), and other instruments) is “weaker” (Moutoussis and Zeki 2002; Van Vugt et al. 2018; Fontan et al. 2021; Stein et al. 2021). Crucially, this difference in robustness of neural response to a stimulus does not require a corresponding change in the physical attributes of the stimulus (e.g. in its contrast or intensity). This is clearly demonstrated in binocular rivalry experiments (Blake 2001; Hesse and Tsao 2020) in which a physically unchanging stimulus alternates between being consciously visible and invisible.

We interpret these findings in the following way. For conscious perception to happen, additional processing to that which has been sufficient for unconscious processing of the stimulus is needed. As the main difference between preconscious and conscious perceptual contents consists in the strength of the neural response in the same sensory areas, this additional processing has to be in its nature amplificatory. The neural processes initiating the transitions of preconscious contents into perceptual experience therefore need to possess the required amplificatory capabilities.

We propose that it is the targeted amplification of relevant sensory signals what helps to turn them into experienced contents. The apical theory introduced in the “The mechanism of AA” section provides a neurobiologically realistic mechanism for this targeted amplification. Implicit perceptual contents constituted in the activity in somatic integration zones of pyramidal neurons in L5B and elsewhere remain unconscious unless amplified by the processes of AA. We may call this cellular mechanism a “conscious-status awarding” mechanism (CSAM; Bachmann 2011). That the recorded signals in the sensory sites in unconscious perceptual conditions are weaker than in the conscious conditions can then be explained with the help of this notion. Our hypothesis, consistent with experimental evidence to be presented below, is that the weaker neural response in unconscious conditions can be explained by the absence of CSAM activation (i.e. by the absence of AA), or by its insufficient involvement. We assume that for any content to become conscious content there must be at least some minimal (critical, threshold) levels of AA applied onto neural units representing that content.

The apical consciousness-awarding mechanism is not a content-specific mechanism. In normal perception, the apical input by itself does not specify the feature or object information transmitted via inputs to the basal and perisomatic synapses. Because AA does not specify perceptual contents, it is not confined to any particular sensory modality such as vision or audition. As the presumed cellular CSAM, AA is a general mechanism to be found in the cortical areas where perceptual content is represented.

On the hypothesis that we advocate in this article, implicit, preamplified perceptual contents in the somatic integration zone may retain many of their qualitative attributes such as, e.g. basic features (e.g. orientation, size, contrast polarity, and color category), shape category, basic phonemes, and so on. However, although AA itself is a content-nonspecific process, implicit contents specified in the basal zone may undergo some forms of qualitative transformations due to amplification leading to conscious perception. In particular, without changing the featural or object-category attributes of the stimulus, apical effects may enhance representational salience of visual perceptual features such as subjective contrast and brightness or subjective loudness of an auditory percept. The research literature showing context-dependent variation of subjective saliency or clarity of physically invariant stimuli is rich, encompassing different sensory modalities (Bachmann 1988; Knobel and Sanchez 2009; Liao et al. 2016; Gelbard-Sagiv et al. 2018; Itthipuripat et al. 2019; Carrasco and Barbot 2019; Eklund et al. 2020). Importantly, a change in subjective representational salience of features such as subjective contrast or brightness is just a by-product of “internal,” contextually driven amplificatory processes in the pyramidal cells. Such an enhancement does not strictly require a corresponding change in the external stimulus, in contrast to theories of perceptual consciousness such as Zeki and Bartels (1999).

As a hypothesized cellular part of the CSAM, AA is distributed in modality-specific sensory cortices and other cortical areas. This is in no way a disadvantage of the present account. The cellular CSAM need not exclusively converge on a single common neuron or a local processor of any kind or a single neural structure. All that matters is that “the same type” of cellular process is deployed in different sensory modalities and in distinct areas within modal sensory sites.

It is possible to envisage the employment of this common cellular process as a successive set of cycles of AA, gradually leading to a stable conscious percept. The reverse hierarchy ideas (e.g. Hochstein and Ahissar 2002; Campana et al. 2016) may be relevant here. Coarse, gist-related representations are activated by AA for conscious experience first, and then top-down AA-based activations directed at increasingly concrete, specific representations are adding fine features to the gist. Given the speed of feedforward and top-down signaling volleys contrasted with how long it takes for a subjective percept to become formed (about 200 ms), there is time for such multiple cycles (with bit-by-bit corrections between each cycle).

Although there is much physiological evidence for apical processes in the mammalian brain, obtaining direct experimental evidence implicating AA in conscious perception is extremely challenging. To obtain such evidence, it is necessary to record the specific transactions between distinct parts of a single neuron and correlate them with a concurrent behavior of a living animal. Encouragingly, this correlation was established in a recent study on whisker stimuli detection in mice (Takahashi et al. 2016). The authors performed a two-photon imaging study of apical Ca2+ activity in L5 pyramidal neurons during a perceptual task. The animals were trained to signal the detection of small whisker deflections by licking to obtain water rewards. The experimental results indicate that the ability of the animal to detect whisker deflections is closely correlated with increased levels of calcium currents in the apical dendrites of L5 pyramidal cells in the primary somatosensory cortex. Inversely, the absence of reported detection correlated with a decrease in apical calcium currents. To the extent that overt discriminative behavior of an animal depends on conscious perception, the positive correlation between AA in relevant parts of the somatosensory cortex and successful behavioral detection implies that AA contributes to perceptual consciousness. In the near future, more data of this sort could be obtained with ultra high-resolution fMRI (Larkum et al. 2018), which can resolve neuronal activity across cortical layers and differentiate somatic from apical contributions within individual cells.

Furthermore, Takahashi et al. (2016) successfully applied the injunction to causally intervene into the hypothesized cellular mechanism and track observable behavioral effects (Bickle 2006). Their pharmacological and optogenetic interventions indicate that the detection threshold can be raised or lowered by enhancing or opposing active currents in the apical dendrites, thus demonstrating the causal role of such currents in conscious detection. Another intervention-based paradigm suitable for studying relations between perceptual awareness and AA is transcranial magnetic stimulation. Murphy et al. (2016) demonstrated that a single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation on dendritic activity in layer 5 pyramidal neurons of the somatosensory cortex inhibited dendritic Ca2+ activity. The specificity of such targeted interventions is promising. Recently, it has been convincingly argued that during general anesthesia, apical and somatic zones of pyramidal neurons are decoupled, which prevents the effects of AA (Suzuki and Larkum 2020). As a consequence, feedforward sensory processing continues to some extent during general anesthesia but cannot be brought to the level required for perceptual consciousness. A disadvantage of general anesthesia is that it abolishes all perceptual experience. Studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation could noninvasively uncover local, fine-grained ways in which apical dendrite activity in sensory regions contributes to conscious perception.


AA distinguishes modulation from the specification of the informational content

The cellular CSAM must be capable of amplifying selected sensory signals without corrupting their informational content. Feedback from higher regions is a notable source of modulatory input, but the information fed back does not become part of the sensory input to which the cell is tuned. If information from the recurrent apical inputs was merged with the cells’ somatic inputs, the message that the cell initially “broadcasts” would be lost or distorted. In L5 pyramidal neurons, this amplification without merging is achieved by the functional specialization of the two distinct integration zones.

The view of pyramidal neurons as two-point processors is in contrast with the standard view of a one-point neuron. The central tenet of the system-level neuroscience has long been that, for neurons in general, all positive and negative inputs to the soma are summed, and an action potential is triggered if that sum exceeds a threshold. However, pyramidal cells with two points of integration operate in a fundamentally different way. They use a summed input to the tuft dendrites to amplify response to the somatic and perisomatic inputs. In this amplifying mode of function, the cell’s action potentials transmit information specifically about the somatic/perisomatic sum but not about the apical sum.

Using recent advances in the foundations of information theory, amplification has been formally defined as the use of one subset of inputs to modulate the transmission of information about other inputs without transmitting any information specifically about itself (Kay and Phillips 2020). The two-point neuron view thus allows a clear distinction between modulatory amplification and merging (or “combining”) information from the somatic and apical inputs.

In contrast to the Dendritic Integration Theory (Bachmann et al. 2020; Aru et al. 2020b), the hypothesis presented in this article does not require that the cellular processes comprising AA achieve a “representational match” in the content of both integration zones. This would be difficult to achieve, because the modulating apical inputs from higher regions bring a different sort of information than the feature-specific cells in the sensory regions—remember that, e.g. the amygdala is included in the diverse sources that provide inputs to the apical dendrites in layer 1. Furthermore, in order for the representational match between the two integration zones to occur, the cells in lower regions would have to inherit the large receptive fields of cells in the higher regions providing the apical feedback inputs. This, however, does not happen. All that matters for AA is whether the net excitatory input to the apical integration zone is positive when the net somatic or perisomatic input is positive. It would thus be misleading to describe the apical inputs as “matching” the somatic inputs in any sense other than in the statistics of their co-occurrence.


Context-sensitivity and selectivity of AA

AA is not a mechanism blind to the current context of the organism’s percepts, needs, threats, or emotional state. On the contrary, AA enables rapid, effective, and energetically low-cost context-sensitive selection of information. The aim of contextual guidance in perceptual processing is to amplify transmission of information that is coherent, relevant, and informative, while attenuating transmission of other information. Apical dendrites are in this sense selective and context-sensitive. This selectivity and context-sensitivity is made possible by the diversity of the sources of apical input. As has been remarked, these inputs arrive not just from various cortical sites but also from “nonspecific” thalamic nuclei and from the amygdala. The fluctuating levels of arousal add further forms of context-sensitivity, which either increase or decrease the probability of perceptual experience and either expand or narrow its focus. AA thus combines holistic aspects of processing with local specificity at the level of individual cells.

It may be thought that some forms of perception require no context. However, on closer inspection, this assumption is problematic. Perception always occurs in the context of other stimuli, particular states of mind, and usually also in the context of particular goals. This implies that there is always the possibility that perception could be modulated at the cellular level by any aspect of that rich context. This concerns also the highly artificial and seemingly contextless types of perception, such as those present in binocular rivalry conditions. To be presented with two mutually inconsistent images, each to a different eye, already provides a very specific context of stimulation: two perceptual interpretations of what is seen are possible. In this case, two competing candidate percepts at the preconscious level resolve their competition by means of inhibitory interneurons. These interneurons are influenced by stochastic alternation of relative strengths of inhibitory presynaptic effects on layer 5 neurons representing the competing objects (e.g. in V1 or in the temporal cortex; see Theodoni et al. 2011; Mentch et al. 2019). As shown in, apical dendrites receive inhibitory inputs, e.g. via SOM-expressing interneurons, from which a dynamically selected few are released by the disinhibitory effects of VIP-expressing inhibitory interneurons. The evidence that is now available concerning the effects of these inhibitory/disinhibitory dynamics provides strong support for our conception of a functionally distinct apical zone (Schuman et al. 2021). We can assume that in the case of binocular rivalry those dynamics ensure that at any moment only one of the alternative percepts is selected for amplification and consequently becomes part of conscious experience.

The notion of perception in the absence of any context is also helpful when viewed from a different perspective. Suppose one asks, not what happens when no context is present, but what happens when contextual input received via the apical dendrites is prevented from affecting the cell’s generation of action potentials. As noted in the “A cellular conscious-status awarding mechanism operates upon unconsciously computed perceptual contents” section, this is what is thought to happen during general anesthesia: apical and somatic zones of pyramidal neurons are decoupled, which prevents the effects of AA (Suzuki and Larkum 2020). The outcome is the complete loss of conscious experience. The same seems to be true for slow-wave sleep (see, e.g. Phillips et al. 2018; Aru et al. 2020a).

A striking example of contextual modulation at lower levels of perceptual hierarchies is provided by anatomical and physiological studies of the interactions between primary sensory regions. The primary sensory regions mutually interact via synaptic connections in layer 1 of neocortex (Ibrahim et al. 2016; Deneux et al. 2019, as shown in). These interactions, which we take to be an example of context-sensitive AA, use information from other modalities to amplify transmission of modality-specific information. For instance, such interactions can increase the detectability of a near threshold visual event if it occurs at the same time as an auditory event. The sound-induced flash illusion (Shams et al. 2000) is another example of this phenomenon. In sound-induced flash illusion, a single visual flash accompanied by two auditory tones is erroneously perceived as two flashes or two visual flashes accompanied by a single auditory tone are erroneously perceived as one flash. Analogous interactions occur between all combinations of primary visual, auditory, and somatosensory cortices (Meijer et al. 2019). Crucially, in line with what has been said in the “Apical amplification distinguishes modulation from the specification of informational content” section, these cross-modal interactions between primary sensory regions do not corrupt the unimodal information transmission that they modulate.

However, where they have been thoroughly studied, the effects of contextual modulation have been found to be a mixture of amplification and suppression that depends on many different variables in complex ways. Amplification via apical dendrites is strictly restrained by inhibitory interneurons that have evolved specifically for that purpose. Amplification needs to be restrained because, as apical dendrites are key links in positive feedback loops, there is the ever-present danger of over-amplification (as shown all too clearly by various pathologies; see, e.g. Phillips and Silverstein 2003; Phillips et al. 2015). Indeed, physiological evidence suggests that more interactions between primary sensory regions may be suppressed than amplified. In order for apical activation to have its amplificatory effects, specialized disinhibitory interneurons must be activated in just those pyramidal cells whose outputs are particularly relevant in the current context.

As noted, the contextual cellular processes we describe are not limited to intracortical interactions. Amplification requires the apical integration zone to be coupled to the soma, and this coupling in turn partly depends upon interactions between the neocortex and the higher-order thalamus. Specific regions of the higher-order thalamus (such as the pulvinar, posterior nucleus, and the intralaminar nuclei) send signals to both the apical trunk and the apical tufts, while it receives descending information from higher cortical regions and ascending information traveling from the receptors via collaterals bypassing specific relays. When these ascending and descending inputs are both excitatory, nuclei in the higher-order thalamus enhance informational selectivity by sending excitatory signals to the apical dendrites of pyramidal cells or to inhibitory or disinhibitory interneurons in sensory regions of the neocortex. This further enhances the signal-to-noise ratio by amplifying the response of cells that track currently relevant features, while attenuating the outputs of those that detect currently irrelevant features (Rubio-Garrido et al. 2009; Groh et al. 2014; Roth et al. 2016). At a more general level, ongoing thalamocortical interactions mediated by the “nonspecific” thalamic nuclei, in particular, the intralaminar nuclei, are a prerequisite for sufficient arousal, allowing context-dependent cortical activity to take place at the level accompanied by subjective awareness (Jones 2012). These thalamocortical interactions can be suppressed, e.g. by experimentally disabling the central medial nucleus of the thalamus, thus preventing it from having its typical cortical arousal effect (Timic Stamenic et al. 2019). A new comprehensive review of these issues by Shepherd and Yamawaki (2021) provides compelling evidence that diverse aspects of conscious perception arise from recurrent cortico-thalamic interactions in which the apical dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal neurons play a leading role.

Many inputs to layer 1, where the apical tufts of pyramidal neurons in layers 2, 3, and 5 are located, come from sources in other brain regions. Only about 10% of inputs reaching the apical zone come from nearby neurons (Binzegger et al. 2004). AA-centered theory therefore claims that while some feedback to the apical zone will be more local (lateral), other forms of feedback will be more long distance. This creates a time frame required by the latencies of the so-called postdictive perceptual phenomena. On some accounts, unconscious perceptual information is maintained and can be manipulated by masking up to 450 ms from the stimulus onset (Drissi-Daoudi et al. 2019). The present theory is able to accommodate such processing delays. It all depends on from where the signals to the apical tufts are arriving, including how many synaptic links there are between the neural source and neural target. Feedback from more remote areas such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), frontal eye fields (FEF), or ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) takes time; this holds also for pathways originating from subcortical structures in the brain stem, including the intralaminar thalamic nuclei or locus coeruleus, and projecting to rostral parts of the cortex (from where the top-down signals are sent to caudal sensory-perceptual areas). All these implies that the time differences with which different kinds of percepts become conscious may depend on the localization of a source sending information to the apical inputs.

It is important, however, to bear in mind that the major part of firing responses to afferent input from receptors, which arrives at the sensory content–representing parts of L5 pyramidal neurons, have the poststimulus delay equal to 50–100 ms or less (Brazier 1977; Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Takahashi et al. 2016). On the other hand, higher-level cognitive and nonspecific phasic arousal effects caused by stimulus presentation and setting the context for the stimulus take longer delays to manifest (around 100–250 ms) (Brazier 1977; Lamme and Roelfsema 2000; Gazzaniga et al. 2014). Thus, in order to observe more robust contextual effects on consciously perceived contents, the information setting the context has to be preset before the stimulus by some time. Because of this, the AA-centered account is also well-positioned to explain backward masking, subjective contrast enhancement in spatial precueing of target perception, the flash-lag effect, and similar phenomena exploiting the time shifts between somatic and apical inputs (Bachmann 2015). The preceding stimulus sets the spatial context, with the top-down or phasic arousal effect taking about 100–250 ms to reach cortical neurons. The feedforward information about the following stimulus reaches the cortex within 80 ms (±20 ms). For the temporal coincidence of context-controlled apical and target-controlled somatic signals arriving at the same layer 5 pyramidal neuron, the context-setting first stimulus has to precede the second stimulus by about 70 (±20) ms. In the case of backward masking the optimal temporal coincidence of the apical input and somatic input therefore takes place not for the preceding stimulus content, but for the succeeding (masking) stimulus content. As a result, AA optimizes the backward mask content for conscious perception, not the first presented stimulus content.

In the case of endogenous “attentional” spatial precueing, the pre-cue plays a similar role to the first presented stimulus in backward masking. However, as the spatial arrangement of the pre-cue and target help avoid masking (the stimuli are neighboring, not overlapping), and because now the target is not the first presented, but the following stimulus, instead of masking we get target facilitation. The pre-cue sets the apically directed spatial-contextual modulation in motion ahead in time and as soon as the specific input of the target arrives at L5 pyramidal neuron, the target is perceived. Similarly, target’s subjective contrast will be enhanced as the AA of the target-encoding cells would coincide in time with the strongest somatic input to these cells. In the flash-lag effect (where the time constants may be somewhat different), the preceding signals from the earlier time epochs of the presentation of the continuously changing input preset the apical process and as soon as the input from the following signals of the continuously changing input arrive at the soma of a pyramidal neuron, the respective content appears in conscious perception. However, if a stimulus is not preceded by streamed signals, such as when it is presented as an unchanging separately flashed object, apical modulation is not preset in time for this stimulus and it takes longer for the flashed stimulus to reach consciousness.

Most of the evidence on contextual modulation at the cellular level has come from single-unit studies of species other than humans. Relevant evidence can also be provided by human neuroimaging, however. Although the use of neuroimaging to study these issues is in its infancy, there have already been encouraging discoveries. For example, studies using layer-specific, high-resolution fMRI show that visual information about an occluded part of the object or scene, inferred from the visible surround, peaks of the object or scene peaks in the superficial cortical layers (Muckli et al. 2015; Larkum et al. 2018). This result is to be expected if we assume that information about the visible surround is transmitted as a contextual information to apical synapses in the superficial layers. As fMRI signals predominantly reflect synaptic activity rather than action potentials and reflect inhibitory as well as excitatory synaptic currents, this further supports our claim that a major role for apical dendrites in layer 1 is to mediate modulatory and other effects of the current context.


AA as a bridge between global states of consciousness and conscious perceptual contents

In consciousness studies, conscious perceptual contents are traditionally distinguished from the global states of consciousness, such as the mutually exclusive states of wakefulness, dreamless sleep, coma, minimal consciousness, dreams, or general anesthesia (Massimini et al. 2005; Owen et al. 2009; Hohwy 2009; Windt and Noreika 2011; Meyer 2015; Bayne et al. 2016; Fazekas and Overgaard 2016; Bayne and Carter 2018). While experienced contents are in constant flux, global states of consciousness change far less rapidly (although undergoing internal variations such as the various levels of arousal during wakefulness). It has therefore become common to treat the global states as mere background preconditions for consciousness of particular perceptual contents (see Chalmers 2000; Koch et al. 2016). As a consequence, experimental strategies for studying states and contents became largely independent.

This bifurcation of consciousness studies into two largely separate branches is problematic in light of the various systematic links between global states and contents. To begin with, despite continuous, moment-to-moment changes in experienced contents in a global state, the state always has “some” experienced content. Putting aside the “zero” states such as coma, dreamless sleep, or general anesthesia, we cannot be in a global state that has no subjectively experienced contents (see also Bachmann 2012; Bachmann and Hudetz 2014; Phillips et al. 2018; Aru et al. 2019). The global states are most convincingly distinguished from each other by first-person experiences of sensations, perceptions, feelings, or episodic memories (however dull, fragmented, or, to the opposite, vivid these contents are). In addition, some contents can initiate a transition in the global state: a pain may become so intense that the subject loses consciousness altogether, or a sudden sound, processed initially subconsciously, breaks through so as to wake up the recipient who thus acquires a state of waking consciousness. Equally important is the reverse dependence of experienced contents on global states. The global state determines the overall nature of experienced contents: there is a narrowly focused subjective content in an emergency, somewhat restricted or blurred content in mildly sedated subjects, and surreal content in hallucinogenic altered states.

Given all these mutual dependencies, a comprehensive theory of perceptual consciousness may be expected to elucidate the neurobiological links between global states of consciousness and experienced contents. Building on prior work of Bachmann and Hudetz (2014), Aru et al. (2019), and Bachmann et al. (2020), we will show that on the AA-centered theory, the distinction between experienced contents and global states of consciousness is not as hard and fast as is often assumed. Although global states are maintained by partly different neurophysiological systems than contents (mainly by subcortical structures in the brain stem and midbrain in the case of waking consciousness—see Baars 1995), there is close coordination in their mechanisms. Cellular mechanisms supporting apical function in L5 pyramidal cells act as a bridge between global states of consciousness and conscious perceptual contents.

At the cellular and molecular level, the link between global states and perceptual contents is forged in the delicate interplay between the targeted AAs described above and the more diffuse activity of various neuromodulators. The presence of an appropriate global state per se does not explain the presence of particular consciously experienced contents. Rather, the neuromodulators supporting the global states, in particular the global state of active wakefulness, pave the way for the AA of particular local contents without being in itself sufficient for perceptual consciousness. They enable and enhance the coupling between apical and somatic integration zones (Phillips et al. 2018; Suzuki and Larkum 2020).

There are significant variations in waking arousal in terms of varying degrees of alertness or sleepiness. Levels of both cholinergic and aminergic activation fluctuate during quiet, active, and stressed waking, with adrenergic fluctuations being on a faster time-scale. Apart from them, differences in the degree of focus, emotional tone, and the relative dominance of external percepts and internal thoughts all co-characterize the currently dominant global state. Adrenergic, cholinergic, and other groups of neuromodulators converge on apical function as the final common pathway by which they affect the global state of consciousness. Apical dendrites are exceptionally sensitive to the neuromodulators that regulate phase changes in global states, such as those from sleep to wakefulness, from sleep to dreaming, or from quiet to active wakefulness (Carr et al. 2007; Barth et al. 2008; Robbins and Arnsten 2009). Furthermore, the master regulator of the neuromodulators, orexin (hypocretin) has a direct effect on pyramidal cells; this effect plays a major role in maintaining wakefulness (Sakurai 2007).

However, the effects of various neuromodulators are not limited to maintaining the global state and its level of arousal. Cholinergic, adrenergic, serotonergic, histaminergic, and orexinergic neuromodulators associated with arousal all specifically enhance apical function by increasing or decreasing the extent to which the apical integration zone affects the somatic output of pyramidal cells. Input to the apical integration zone has little or no effect in REM and slow-wave sleep, which correlates well with the low levels of adrenergic and cholinergic activation in these global states. In the awake mode, the function of the apical integration zone is usually amplifying, but the extent of amplification is modulated by the level of arousal, ranging from moderate in states of quiet wakefulness to excessive when stress is too high. Arousal is thus a second-order contextual effect: it modulates the local contextual modulation in apical dendrites.

How is the effect of arousal on the global state of consciousness implemented in the apical integration zone? Activating adrenoreceptors in awake mice increases calcium currents in the apical tuft and lowers the threshold for the generation of amplificatory calcium spikes by the apical integration zone (Labarrera et al. 2018). These effects are produced by reducing the “leaking” Ih (hyperpolarization-activated) currents that flow through nonsynaptic HCN (hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide–gated) channels in apical dendrites and reduce AA. Besides adrenergic neuromodulators, histamine and serotonin also inhibit the AA-reducing Ih currents.

To repeat, this is not to say that the neuromodulatory influence itself is sufficient for perceptual awareness. Rather, it paves the way for the amplification of particular contents. Take cholinergic influence on apical function as an example of this process. Cholinergic activation is an enabling factor in apical function because it has a role in linking apical input to the soma and in disinhibiting apical input. In addition to this, cholinergic arousal increases apical effects on the cell’s output by enhancing activation of the VIP interneurons that inhibit the tonic activity of SOM inhibitory interneurons in locally specific ways (Brombas et al. 2014; Karnani et al. 2014). However, cholinergic activation itself is not sufficient to specify what will be consciously perceived: this depends on excitatory inputs to disinhibited apical branches. Without such inputs, the implicit perceptual contents processed in somatic parts of sensory neurons will not be amplified to the level sufficient for conscious perception, no matter how significant the cholinergic contributions will be.

Furthermore, as there are multiple neuromodulatory routes by which apical function can be enhanced, some of those routes may not even be necessary for normal perceptual awareness. When one of them fails, e.g. as does the adrenergic system in cataplexy, the others are still adequate to preserve perceptual experience. This is true especially of the highly correlated activities of aminergic (adrenergic, serotonergic, and histaminergic) systems. Each of them is an enabling factor that contributes to arousal that is a precondition of conscious experience, even though none of them is by itself individually necessary.

Finally, the effects of neuromodulators are not limited to their contribution of supporting and maintaining the global state of consciousness. They can also directly influence various aspects of conscious perception. For example, transient adrenergic bursts in the awake state directly increase the focus of conscious processing on selected stimuli in a way that enhances perceptual awareness of these stimuli, as well as memory for them (Mather et al. 2016). Similarly, drugs that increase adrenergic activation increase people’s ability to detect and discriminate weak visual stimuli; drugs that decrease adrenergic activation have the opposite effect on perception (Gelbard-Sagiv et al. 2018; for a mechanism with a similar effect in rodents, see Labarrera et al. 2018). Moreover, in some global states, the nature of consciously perceived contents is directly affected by neuromodulators. Serotonin has strong effects on phenomenology and so do the various hallucinogens associated with altered states of consciousness, such as psilocybin, muscarin, and others (Corlett et al. 2019; Császár-Nagy et al. 2019; Dos Santos and Hallak 2020; Vollenweider and Preller 2020). In sum, the distinction between global state mechanisms and content mechanisms becomes somewhat blurry at the level of intracellular processes.


Miscellaneous issues that arise


Relations of the AA theory to the dominant network-level accounts of perceptual consciousness

In looking for cellular foundations of perceptual experience, we do not assume that perceptual experience occurs at the cellular level (but see Edwards 2005; Sevush 2006). Neither do we claim, as Bickle (2006) does, that the network-level processes studied by the cognitive neuroscience of consciousness are a merely heuristically useful stage of inquiry, ultimately leading theorists to explanations of perceptual consciousness at the cellular and molecular levels. Rather, our claim is that events at the network level need to be complemented by explanations of cellular processes such as those described in this article, if we are to understand and explain perceptual experience. Our hypothesis is that AA provides cellular mechanisms that are necessary for the network dynamics of which our full-blown human perceptual experience consists.

In line with this proposal, AA may be conceived as the first, cellular stage of the entire coordinated set of CSAMs that turn unconscious contents into conscious ones and span multiple levels of functional organization. The AA-based theory is thus not a direct competitor of network-level theories of consciousness such as the recurrent processing theory (RPT; Lamme 2010), the global neuronal workspace theory (Dehaene 2014; Mashour et al. 2020), or the integrated information theory (IIT; Tononi and Koch 2015). Rather, together with (Aru et al. 2020b), we propose that it provides cellular mechanisms for basic capabilities implied by these theories.

On RPT, sensory areas need recurrent inputs from higher areas in order for conscious perception to take place. Apical dendrites are implicated in this recurrence on anatomical grounds because they are the dendrites most affected by recurrent signals. Recurrent signals affect apical dendrites both directly via excitatory synapses and indirectly via the activation of the interneurons that inhibit or disinhibit them. Apical dendrites are also implicated in recurrence on the grounds that recurrence is in danger of generating runaway overexcitation if activity of cells in each part of the loop is sufficient to generate activity in the next. This danger can be overcome if at least at one stage of the loop the recurrent connections cannot drive activity by themselves but operate as amplifiers of response to input from outside the loop. Importantly, on the present account, it is not recurrence per se that contributes to make the perceptual contents conscious. Rather, recurrence contributes to conscious perception by triggering intracellular amplifications that greatly strengthen the effects of the cell’s output at the sites to which it projects.

Global neuronal workspace theory proposes a different network-level consciousness-awarding mechanism than RPT. It suggests that unconsciously encoded signals from sensory-perceptual nodes must be widely broadcast to other parts of the cortex. This idea receives some support from neuroimaging evidence that a sensory input activates more cortical regions when it is experienced than when it is not. AA may contribute to the broadcasting on which this theory relies. The output of some pyramidal cells may be “broadcast” in the sense that it is used as part of the contextual input to cells in different cortical regions. This sort of broadcasting may have a wide range of different breadths. Some pyramidal cells could provide modulatory apical input to a few other cells. Some could provide inputs to many more. No pyramidal cell could directly provide apical input to all columns in the same or other regions, but some cells may be able to contribute to the apical input of many other cells indirectly via a chain of intermediary loops. We propose that AA makes this kind of broadcasting feasible because it allows cells to receive broadcast signals while retaining their own locally specific contribution to the transmission of sensory information. The broadcast tells them whether the highly specific sensory information that they are designed to detect is or is not relevant to the ongoing activity of the system as a whole. This information about relevance is communicated to them via their apical dendrites in layer 1.

There is also overlap between context-sensitive selective AA and IIT. The AA hypothesis was formulated because it provides cellular foundations for a long-lasting theory of the contextual guidance of processing and learning in the neocortex, i.e. the theory of Coherent Infomax. Although the mathematical formulation of AA as a part of the theory of Coherent Infomax is not emphasized in this article, the objectives, learning rules (Kay and Phillips 2011), and short-term activation dynamics (Kay and Phillips 2020) of that theory have all been formulated explicitly in information theoretic terms. The theory of Coherent Infomax was related in detail to cortical computation long ago (Phillips and Singer 1997), although not at the cellular level until recently (Phillips et al. 2016; Phillips 2017). The distinction between receptive fields and contextual fields, on which the theory of Coherent Infomax is based, is equivalent to that between the basal input, which specifies receptive field sensitivity, and apical input, which conveys contextual field information.

Thus, AA provides a cellular mechanism for the short-term dynamics of contextual modulation required by Coherent Infomax. That theory and IIT are both explicitly formulated in information theoretic terms and “information” has the same meaning in both theories. The difference is that although “Coherence” is in some ways analogous to the holistic property referred to as “Integration” in IIT, the Coherent Infomax does not conceptualize the processing in visual and other sensory areas in terms of integration: the contextual field information processed via apical dendrites does not integrate with the feedforward somatic information. In addition, IIT mostly confines the processes implementing visual perceptual experience to the “posterior HOT-zone” comprising temporal, parietal, and occipital areas (Koch et al. 2016). Although the AA theory also emphasizes the role of posterior areas in conscious perception, it insists that they must be supported by contextual apical inputs that partly originate beyond the posterior region. Without such inputs, perceptual contents will not be amplified and, consequently, will not become conscious.


Different kinds or degrees of AA?

A hypothesis worthy of further exploration is that different kinds or degrees of selective AA are at the root of different modes of conscious perception. For example, it is possible that information that is amplified to a small extent above the low level of spontaneous cellular activity helps to establish the broad field of conscious experience, whereas the focus of conscious experience is related to the activity of a small subset of cells, the output of which is amplified far more by attention.

A perspective on these two stages of perceptual awareness that resonates with the capabilities of context-sensitive pyramidal cells is proposed by Lamme (2004b,. He interprets much of the evidence from studies of vision as indicating that there are major transitions from being fully invisible to being visible, and, from being unattended to being attended when visible. Context-sensitivity of two-point neurons could provide a cellular foundation for selection at both stages. Preattentive amplification is likely to depend on many contextual interactions that are highly local in space and time, operate in parallel across the visual field as a whole, and remain largely, if not wholly, confined to particular sensory areas. Attentive amplification in the second stage is more likely to depend on a wider context that includes current goals and emotional reactions as well as stimulus salience. It therefore depends more on nonlocal apical inputs coming from distant sources and takes longer.

As we stressed (in the “Context-sensitivity and selectivity of AA” section) the role of higher-order thalamic nuclei in context-sensitive perception, it is important to add that higher-order thalamus also participates in the control of the AA-mediated attention. As Schmitt et al. (2017) have recently shown, recurrent loops connecting the higher-order thalamus with regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) sustain attention by their amplifying effects on cortical connectivity, and are particularly complex, even in mice. Apical dendrites have a central role in these recurrent loops, with connections from the dorsal thalamic nucleus going to apical synapses near the apical spike initiation zone of cells in PFC, and connections from the ventral thalamic nucleus going to the more distant tips of the apical tuft (Collins et al. 2018). The functional consequences of these complexities are yet to be unraveled, but it is already clear that these recurrent corticothalamic connections avoid creating strong loops because higher-order thalamus has modulatory, rather than driving, effects on the PFC (Collins et al. 2018). This is in line with the finding that too much of attentional amplification may actually “extinguish” conscious awareness (see Bachmann and Murd 2010; Bachmann 2011; Murd and Bachmann 2011). Therefore, a simple picture in which more amplification always implies more sharply focused attentive awareness must be resisted.


AA and backpropagation algorithms

Given the extraordinary success of machine learning based upon the backpropagation algorithm, the possibility that something similar to it happens in the neocortex is now under intense investigation. One of the models employed in this project is based on the distinction between apical and basal inputs (e.g. Sacramento et al. 2018). We agree that research on this issue is of great importance, but think that it still has far to go before it reaches the multitasking context-sensitive flexibility of the mammalian neocortex. First, backpropagation algorithms use the backpropagated signals to guide learning, not ongoing processing. In contrast to that, there is ample evidence that the neocortex uses context not only for learning but also, and primarily, to amplify the transmission of selected signals, such as those signaling the presence of a figure against the ground or providing information relevant to the current task (see, for instance, Lamme 2004a; Gilbert and Sigman 2007; Phillips et al. 2010). Second, analogies between backpropagation in machine learning and pyramidal cells with two points of integration face the problem of distinguishing the effects of the backpropagated input from that of all the other inputs to the apical dendrites of pyramidal cells. Third, input to the apical dendrite has been directly shown to guide learning as well as processing, but nothing in this evidence in any obvious way suggests that this process is analogous to the backpropagation machine-learning algorithm (Doron et al. 2020). Fourth, although attempts to develop useful algorithms in which contextual input to apical dendrites guides both processing and learning are in their infancy, there have already been some success. One of these, argued to be relevant to consciousness studies, uses the formal distinction between receptive and contextual fields to illuminate multisensory audiovisual speech processing (Adeel 2020). An earlier theory of learning with two sites of synaptic integration has highlighted the transfer only of the relevant information from higher to lower regions, with relevance being signaled by the apical input (Körding and König 2000). This theory shows how location invariant object recognition can be achieved by this intracellular mechanism. Finally, Haga and Fukai (2018) develop a model in which apical input guides fast robust learning of sequences of neuronal activity. In this model, apical input affects current processing via a multiplicative gain modulation. None of these recent models use the backpropagation learning algorithm. The consequences of such new lines of research on the contextual guidance of both learning and processing for our understanding of the neocortex, and for AI technology, are potentially groundbreaking.


Concluding remarks

The perspective outlined in this article is essentially in agreement with the dendritic integration theory of Aru et al. (2020b) and Bachmann et al. (2020), but there are differences. First, there is a simple matter of terminology. The phrase “apical amplification” makes clear that the perspective advocated here concerns apical dendrites in particular, not dendritic computation in general. Second, and more importantly, “amplification” contrasts with “integration” in that the key point of the notion of amplification is that information about the amplifier is kept separate from the information transmitted by the signal that is amplified. Thus, the notion of amplification is explicitly distinguished from what is meant by “integration” in mathematics, and as intended in the much used description of the “integrate-and-fire” mode in which point neurons operate. Third, as noted in the “Apical amplification distinguishes modulation from the specification of informational content” section, our view of AA does not imply any form of pattern matching between apical and somatic contents. Fourth, the perspective advocated here explicitly argues that context-sensitive selection between alternatives is a cardinal function of conscious experience. Fifth, the perspective advocated here emphasizes a range of subcortical inputs to apical dendrites that extends well beyond inputs from the higher-order thalamus and includes input from neuromodulators of the arousal systems (which are crucial to the role of apical dendrites in conscious experience, as we discussed in some detail in the “AA as a bridge between global states of consciousness and conscious perceptual contents” section). In particular, we put emphasis on adrenergic arousal, which dendritic integration theory does not mention at all. Finally, our notion of AA is distinctive in being built on the long-standing mathematical formulation of the different functions of receptive and contextual fields that were developed as part of the theory of Coherent Infomax (e.g. Phillips and Singer 1997) before the discoveries suggesting that apical dendrites may be able to function as contextual field information receptors.

As the list of these differences between AA and dendritic integration theory show, the two theories are complementary, not conflicting. Our conception of AA as a cellular mechanism for selective conscious perception also resonates with several other prior proposals (e.g. Cauller and Kulics 1988, Cauller and Connors 1992; LaBerge et al. 2000; Spratling and Johnson 2004; LaBerge and Kasevich 2013). These different proposals have different emphases, however. For example, whereas LaBerge and colleagues put emphasis on EEG rhythms and synchronized oscillations (LaBerge and Kasevich 2017), we put emphasis on neuromodulatory arousal. These different emphases are mutually supportive, however, not antagonistic, because the different proposals share the common conception of apical dendrites in layer 1 as a channel for the amplification of selected signals.

As context-sensitive selective amplification is such a basic cognitive requirement and context-sensitive neurons with two points of integration are so ubiquitous throughout the cortex, the perspective advocated here raises indefinitely many issues whose resolution will require the efforts of many laboratories for decades to come. Only a few of these issues have been identified in this article. Still, there are several ways in which this article advances beyond prior publications arguing that apical dendrites are a major route by which context guides processing and learning. First, the possibility that this apical route provides cellular mechanisms relevant to conscious perceptual experience is examined rigorously in this article from a theoretical viewpoint and is explicitly related to currently prominent theories of the neuronal bases of consciousness. Second, earlier articles argued for close relations between AA and conscious experience on the grounds that both depend on adrenergic arousal (Phillips et al. 2016). This claim is modified here by increasing emphasis on the role of other neuromodulators also and cholinergic arousal in particular. Third, for the first time, cross-modal interactions between unimodal cortical regions are shown to provide clear demonstrations of both contextual modulation and its dependence on apical dendrites in layer 1 of the neocortex. Fourth, AA is here related to experiments exploring the extent of nonconscious perceptual processing, such as the studies of visual masking.

Research on dendritic computation is in its infancy and still has far to go. Many will assume that an adequate computational explication of how conscious experience at the network level arises from intracellular processes is a far distant milestone in that journey. Nevertheless, it may well be reached within this decade or the next. It is already clear that functional distinctions between apical and basal dendrites have a major role in dendritic computation and that this principle has a central role in capabilities restricted to the wakeful state, such as perceptual disambiguation, attention, working memory, and learning (Poirazi and Papoutsi 2020). There is also clear evidence for distinctively human forms of apical function because the apical integration zone is more effectively separated from the soma in human pyramidal cells (Beaulieu-Laroche et al. 2018; Gidon et al. 2020), and a newly discovered inhibitory interneuron not observed in rodents is part of the inhibitory/disinhibitory microcircuitry that specifically regulates the activation of apical dendrites (Boldog et al. 2018). Further properties of human pyramidal cells that enable them to perform computations previously thought to require networks of neurons are reviewed by Poirazi and Papoutsi (2020). Consequences of reaching the milestone of rigorously establishing the cellular foundations of human conscious experience in explicit information processing terms are unforeseeable. They would surely be transformative for medicine by enabling strategies for managing malfunctions, whether physiological or psychological, to be engineered, rather than being developed by trial and error. The consequences of releasing the capabilities of conscious information processing from biological constraints by embodying them in silicon are at present unimaginable.


Consciousness and the fallacy of misplaced objectivity

Francesco Ellia, Jeremiah Hendren, Matteo Grasso, Csaba Kozma, Garrett Mindt, Jonathan P. Lang, Andrew M. Haun, Larissa Albantakis et al. — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8519344, CC BY 4.0.

Objective correlates—behavioral, functional, and neural—provide essential tools for the scientific study of consciousness. But reliance on these correlates should not lead to the ‘fallacy of misplaced objectivity’: the assumption that only objective properties should and can be accounted for objectively through science. Instead, what needs to be explained scientifically is what experience is intrinsically—its subjective properties—not just what we can do with it extrinsically. And it must be explained; otherwise the way experience feels would turn out to be magical rather than physical. We argue that it is possible to account for subjective properties objectively once we move beyond cognitive functions and realize what experience is and how it is structured. Drawing on integrated information theory, we show how an objective science of the subjective can account, in strictly physical terms, for both the essential properties of every experience and the specific properties that make particular experiences feel the way they do.


The objective study of objective correlates of consciousness

Since the nineteenth century, researchers interested in the mind have tried to employ methods and tools that would ensure objectivity, varying primarily in what they considered as the proper standards of science. For example, Fechner and the early psychophysicists and psychologists considered “laws” as the paradigm of scientific objectivity and sought to establish laws connecting the mental and the physical (Wundt 1904; Fechner 1948; Pigorini et al. 2015). In the twentieth century, the emphasis shifted to characterizing behaviors, understanding cognitive functions irrespective of their implementation, or identifying the precise neural correlates of consciousness and its contents. Each of these research programs has contributed extensively to the scientific study of consciousness.


Behavioral correlates

John Watson, the figurehead of behaviorism, admitted the existence of consciousness but claimed that it had “never been seen, touched, smelled, tasted, or moved” (Watson and McDougall 1929). A truly scientific psychology should only consider observable stimuli and responses, which could be characterized objectively, treating everything in between as a black box. The way things feel, thought Watson, lay outside the scope of objective scientific explanation.

At the bedside, neurologists still use behavioral observations and carefully designed stimulus–response tests to assess the presence or absence of consciousness, although such tests have clear limitations. For example, the commonly used Glasgow Coma Scale considers patients’ ability to move their eyes, speak, and move their body (Posner et al. 2019). On the other hand, we now think that some behaviorally unresponsive patients are conscious because, like healthy subjects, they can activate the appropriate cortical regions when asked to imagine different scenarios (Owen et al. 2006). Conversely, behaviors such as tracking a target with the eyes may occur in the absence of experience (Bruno et al. 2010). In the course of general anesthesia, too, consciousness is regularly assessed based on the loss of behavioral responsiveness. However, some anesthetized patients can respond to commands if an arm is left unparalyzed (Sanders et al. 2012; Linassi et al. 2018) or report vivid dreams after surgical-level ketamine infusions (Sarasso et al. 2015). This should come as no surprise since during natural sleep we remain largely immobile and unresponsive, even though we dream through much of the night (Siclari et al. 2017). The limitations of behavioral correlates are clearest in assessing the presence of consciousness in animal species very different from us or in intelligent robots. In fact, a properly equipped robot could easily pass a neurological examination much better than many conscious patients in a neurology ward. Should we infer that the robot is more conscious than they are?


Functional correlates

Starting in the 1950s, researchers in computer science, psychology, and linguistics realized that treating the mind (and consciousness) as a black box was hopelessly inadequate. If we wish to explain how the mind works, they thought, we must consider not just inputs and outputs, but also internal states and operations on them. Science had to open the black box and replace it with multiple interacting boxes, corresponding to various cognitive functions.

The cognitive sciences have been remarkably successful, especially when married to neuroscience (Gazzaniga et al. 2019; Postle 2020). We have learned a great amount about cognitive functions such as attention, working memory, executive functions, and language. Broadly speaking, however, the objectives of study of the cognitive sciences are the functions and objective manifestations of the mind, rather than consciousness itself. For many decades, if consciousness was mentioned at all, it was identified with the content of attention and working memory, which could be cognitively manipulated and reported.

Lately, it has become acceptable to refer to consciousness explicitly. However, the understanding is that only what is cognitively “accessible” and thus reportable can be the object of science, in contrast to the purely “phenomenal” properties of consciousness—what experience is and how it feels. And yet, it is precisely those phenomenal aspects that make consciousness what it is and that we should hope to explain. Who would settle for going through life carrying out every function normally, including access and report, but without phenomenology—doing everything while experiencing nothing? Similarly, we need to know whether an unresponsive patient feels anything, not just whether she can access those feelings or not. And we would want to know whether an intelligent robot—one that can behave autonomously, attend, remember, and report—is having experiences or merely acting as if it did.


Neural correlates

In the 1990s, neuroscientists started approaching consciousness in earnest and programmatically. Crick and Koch (1990) promoted the search for the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC), arguing that “the problem of consciousness can, in the long run, be solved only by explanations at the neural level.” The full NCC can be defined as the minimum neuronal mechanisms jointly sufficient for any one specific conscious experience (Chalmers 2000). Crick and Koch (2003) proposed several candidates, such as neurons firing at around 40 Hz or neurons projecting directly to prefrontal cortex.

A useful distinction is between content-specific NCC—the neural mechanisms specifying particular phenomenal contents, such as a particular color, sound, face, or place—and the full NCC—the union of the content-specific NCC that contribute a particular experience (Koch et al. 2016). Content-specific NCC can be investigated through a combination of recording, stimulation, and lesion data, revealing which neural mechanisms contribute to experience. The full NCC can be identified by comparing conditions in which consciousness as a whole is present or absent—e.g. by comparing brain activity during dreaming and dreamless sleep (Siclari et al. 2017). It is also important to distinguish between NCC and background conditions for consciousness. For example, just like blood flow to the brain, an adequate level of activity of arousal systems in the reticular formation of the brainstem is typically required for being conscious, but this does not mean that brainstem cell groups contribute specific contents to experience. The goal of NCC research is to gather enough empirical evidence to establish objectively which brain areas and neural elements can or cannot support consciousness and its contents—e.g. the cerebral cortex and/or thalamus, the front and/or back of the cortex, some particular cell layers or types, some particular modes of firing, and so on (Koch et al. 2016).

NCC research has opened the doors to powerful new tools that allow us to decode the contents of experience from distributed neural activities in the cerebral cortex (Poldrack 2011; Davis and Poldrack 2013). The promise of these methods was clear early on: “Using information that was present in the multivariate pattern of responses to stimulus features, we could accurately predict, and therefore track, participants’ conscious experience from the fMRI signal alone while it underwent many spontaneous changes” (Haynes and Rees 2005). Techniques have advanced rapidly, allowing researchers to partially decode the content of dreams (Horikawa et al. 2013), to increase the precision of decoded contents (Kriegeskorte and Douglas 2019), and to map the cortical representations of similar and different contents (Diedrichsen and Kriegeskorte 2017).

Decoding the contents of consciousness from brain activity patterns is admittedly not the same as explaining how they feel. However, at least some neuroscientists have pursued NCC research with the hope to gain some critical insight into the subjective properties of experience (Crick and Koch 2003): “No one has produced any plausible explanation as to how the experience of the redness of red could arise from the actions of the brain. It appears fruitless to approach this problem head-on. Instead, we are attempting to find the neural correlate(s) of consciousness (NCC), in the hope that when we can explain the NCC in causal terms, this will make the problem of qualia clearer.”


The fallacy of misplaced objectivity

But should we even hope to account for the subjective properties of consciousness? Following the Galilean tradition, many believe that all we should do—and can hope to do scientifically—is to objectively study the objective correlates of the presence and contents of experience, as accessed through cognitive functions such as attention and working memory. This view, we argue, commits the fallacy of misplaced objectivity: the assumption that only objective properties should and can be accounted for objectively through science.


Consciousness is what consciousness does? Substituting function for phenomenology

“We argue that all theories of consciousness that are not based on functions and access are not scientific theories. […] A true scientific theory will say how functions such as attention, working memory and decision making interact and come together to form a conscious experience” (Cohen and Dennett 2011). This quote is an especially explicit assertion that all we can study scientifically is what subjects can access through attention, and eventually report, about the presence and the contents of consciousness. In this view, only functions matter since they can be studied objectively by independent observers. This attitude is widespread (e.g. Doerig et al. 2019; Graziano 2019; Frankish 2021) and seemingly justified by the Galilean notion of science as the objective investigation of objective properties. Anything beyond function has been considered inexistent (Churchland 1981), illusory (Frankish 2016), or irredeemably phenomenal—i.e. subjective—and thereby outside the scope of science.

Studies of change blindness and partial report, such as the Sperling task, are often brought up in support of a functionalist outlook (Cohen and Dennett 2011). In many such studies, subjects may think that they are experiencing a rich visual scene—one containing numerous objects, contours, or colored patches. But when they are rigorously tested, it turns out, to their surprise, that they failed to notice obvious changes in the scene, such as the disappearance of a prominent object, or that they can report correctly at most 3–4 letters out of a large array. Objectively, we can justifiably infer that subjects did experience what they could access and report—a few items plus some overall gist or “summary statistics.” But any further inference about what they may have experienced subjectively—“inside”—is not supported by what they can report objectively—“outside.”

In this view, therefore, the purported richness of subjective contents should be considered a confabulation or an illusion. And if it is not an illusion, subjective richness is something that cannot be investigated scientifically because there is nothing to go on but the subjects’ objective performance. In other words, from the point of view of science, consciousness is what consciousness does.


Do I say what I see, or do I see what I say? Putting the cart of access before the horse of experience

The kind of evidence just mentioned has recently been questioned by experiments suggesting that subjects’ experiences may be richer than assumed based on standard reporting paradigms (Block 2011, Haun et al. 2017; Usher et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2021). Also, most of the Sperling-type evidence is based on reports of high-level categories, such as objects or characters. Here, however, we emphasize two general points.

First, treating access and report as the gold standard for judging experience puts the cart before the horse, or, more elegantly, inverts the epistemic order. Just like behaviorism, the view that only functions matter forgets that the validity of access and report is grounded in experience, not the other way around. When we are conscious, we can usually engage in various cognitive functions—we can attend to contents, keep them in memory, and manipulate them; we can introspect and reflect on what we experience; and we can usually translate some contents into words. For this reason, we justifiably take reports from other beings who look and act like us as plausible indications of what they experience. But we should remember the proper order of things: it is only because we are conscious that we can report our experiences. For this reason, reports can be treated as convenient proxies for consciousness. Put differently, “I am seeing it, so I can say it” is sensible; “I say it, so I must be seeing it” is absurd.

Second, to claim that all there is to experience is what we can do with it commits the fallacy of misplaced objectivity: it places objectivity not just where it belongs—in the way we explain things—but also where it does not belong—in the things that need to be explained. With consciousness, unlike anything else in science, what needs to be explained is precisely its intrinsic, subjective properties—those that are essential to all experiences and those that are particular to a given experience. If we fall into the fallacy and replace experience with functions, we end up with an explanation of those functions, not of experience.

To be sure, subjective properties may seem impossible to explain, at least at first. They may be outright ineffable (how could I communicate in words what nausea feels like?). They may defeat our analytical skills (how would I decompose the way the face of Mona Lisa looks?). They may exceed our ability to access their content sequentially (how would I articulate how a Jackson Pollock painting looks if I had just one quick glance at it?). Yet each experience feels the particular way it does, and there must be an explanation for how it feels.


Science or magic? Banishing experience rather than accounting for it

Indeed, there must be a reason why things feel the way they do—why space feels extended; time feels flowing; objects, colors, and sounds feel the way they do; and so on. All these subjective properties cannot just happen to feel that particular way in a gratuitous, arbitrary manner. This is one more reason why it is counterproductive to restrict scientific investigations to access and report. Far from ensuring scientific objectivity, it exiles the way experience feels to the realm of magic rather than science.

Moreover, we cannot ignore the overwhelming evidence that ties the content of experience to specific regions of the brain. Why would some regions contribute to experience and others not at all? Why would the same regions contribute to experience when we are awake but not in dreamless sleep? And why would visual cortices contribute to visual experiences “painted” on a 2D canvas, and auditory cortices to auditory experiences “streaming” in an ever-evolving present? There must be an answer to such questions.


The objective study of subjective properties of experience

Against the fallacy of misplaced objectivity, we argue that while the explanation must be objective, what must be explained is subjective—namely, consciousness with all its properties, which is intrinsic to the subject of experience (Tononi 2015). Moreover, subjective properties can be accounted for objectively using the methods of science: we should explain them based on objective properties of the neural substrate of consciousness, rather than consign them to the realm of the inexplicable. The conclusion is that a scientific account of the way experience is and how it is structured intrinsically—rather than of what it can do and what functions it enables extrinsically—should be pursued and can be pursued.

As an illustration, consider the following example. Suppose you are an experimental subject looking at a large, dark screen, fixating in the middle. You are obviously having an experience, regardless of whether you tell yourself or anybody else. You are now asked by the investigators to report what you are seeing. Suppose you answer with a kind of summary statement: “I see a vast, empty canvas.” Then, slightly to the left of fixation, a bright, dashed oval is flashed. You dutifully report that you see a dashed oval and where you see it. The session goes on, and you report seeing two ovals partially overlapping to the left of fixation and then two ovals to the right, one of which includes the other. Then you see five ovals of various sizes at seemingly random locations, although you can still tell where they appeared on the screen. Finally, tens of dashed ovals are flashed at once all over the screen. You then report seeing indeed many ovals all over the screen, but you cannot say where they were located individually, whether and how they were overlapping, or how distant they were from one another.

Based strictly on what you can report at any one time, the investigators might conclude that what you are seeing at any one time is at most a handful of ovals over a vast background. Beyond those few ovals you can report about, nothing much can be said objectively. The investigators, from their extrinsic perspective, are trying to account for what you can do with the experience you are having, not for how it feels from your intrinsic perspective. In other words, they presume what you say to be what you see and thus account for function rather than phenomenology. They may then fruitfully investigate, in neural terms, the mechanisms responsible for the capacity limitations of cognitive functions such as attention and working memory.

But if we want to understand consciousness as such, rather than cognitive functions, we should try to answer two questions: What makes any experience “an experience”? And what makes a specific experience “that experience”? To answer the first question, we should identify the “essential” properties of consciousness—those that are true of every conceivable experience, whether of a dark screen, a landscape, a musical chord, a pain, or a flavor. For instance, what does it take for your current experience—like every conceivable experience—to be a unitary whole and yet be composed of parts? To answer the second question, we should try to identify “specific” properties of particular experiences. For instance, what does it take to make your current experience feel spatially extended? What makes the ovals seem like regions of space? What makes them seem to include or overlap other ovals, or to be located at a certain distance from one another?

In other words, to understand consciousness as such, we should ask questions about its intrinsic structure, not about its extrinsic functions. Of course, the proof of the epistemic pudding is in its scientific outcome. Both the essential and specific properties of consciousness must be accounted for in neural terms. In doing so, we should make use of introspection and reasoning as well as of the behavioral, functional, and neural correlates of consciousness. But the role of these objective correlates should be clear: to validate the explanation, not to surreptitiously replace the thing to be explained.

Below we outline the approach we have taken to develop such an account, namely, IIT (Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi 2015; Tononi et al. 2016). Our goal here is not to present IIT in any detail or to argue for its principles, validity, or uniqueness. Instead, we employ IIT to suggest how one can try to explain the subjective in objective terms—i.e. to explain phenomenal properties, both essential and specific, in terms of physical properties.


The essential properties of every experience: accounting for the presence and absence of consciousness

According to IIT, there are five essential properties that are true of every conceivable experience, even the experience of seeing a featureless, “empty,” dark screen that occupies one’s entire field of vision (like in):

Every experience is “subjective”—intrinsic to a subject. It is for the subject of experience, from the subject’s own intrinsic perspective, rather than for something extrinsic to that subject. Thus, the vast, empty canvas is experienced by me, not by somebody else.

It is “structured,” being composed of phenomenal distinctions and relations among them. A phenomenal distinction is any “part” of an experience, no matter how salient or subtle. In the case of the empty canvas, distinctions are “spots”—patches of the canvas, of any size or shape and at any location. highlights but a handful of spots as dashed ovals. However, countless spots are present in any spatial experience whether they are highlighted as in the figure or not. Relations between these spots can be understood as the way the spots connect to, fuse with, and include one another.

Every experience is “specific”—the particular way it is—rather than generic. For example, the canvas may be empty, or it may contain a few dashed white ovals (as in) or other shapes, at any conceivable location, which may overlap with each other in every conceivable way. And, of course, the canvas could be black or white, blue or red, or it could be any of a countless number of specific scenes.

Every experience is also “unitary.” Thus, the canvas I see cannot be reduced to a left side and a right side that are experienced independently—if it were so, there would be two independent consciousnesses, rather than one. In, e.g. my experience is of all five ovals as a unity, despite their separation and regardless of my point of focus.

Finally, every experience is “definite”—it has borders, containing what it contains, neither less nor more. It does not contain “less” than it contains—e.g. it does not contain only the spots on the left side but not those on the right side, or only the spots in the periphery but not those in the center. It also does not contain “more” than it contains—e.g. spots behind my head.

In summary, my experience of the canvas—like every experience—is an intrinsic, “phenomenal structure” that is specific, unitary, and definite. Different experiences are different phenomenal structures, depending on the particular distinctions and relations that compose them. The structure of experienced space is characterized by extendedness, that of experienced time by flow, that of experienced objects by a binding of general concepts with particular features, and so on. It should be clear, then, that an experience is an intrinsic structure, not a function. It is characterized by what it is, not by what it does.

The intrinsic, phenomenal structure of an experience should have a physical explanation; otherwise how an experience feels would be consigned to magic rather than science. “Physical” is understood in an operational sense: something is physical if it can “make a difference” and “take a difference”—if it has cause–effect power, as demonstrated through observations and manipulations (Tononi 2015). On this basis, IIT proposes an explanatory identity: an experience—a specific “phenomenal structure”—is identical to a specific “cause–effect structure.”

A cause–effect structure captures the causal powers of a physical substrate in a particular state—say, a network of neurons, some active and some inactive. To obtain a cause–effect structure, we must “unfold” the causal powers of the substrate in full. This means systematically observing and manipulating the substrate to assess precisely how subsets of neurons make a difference to and take a difference from other neurons of the substrate. Doing so yields a set of causal distinctions and relations that allow us to evaluate whether the causal powers of the unfolded substrate of an experience can account for its essential phenomenal properties—being intrinsic, structured, specific, unitary, and definite.

Note that by “structure”—phenomenal or physical—we mean an actual entity, existing “here and now” and composed of distinguishable parts (distinctions) related among themselves in various ways (relations). As a structure, a substrate with all its causal powers unfolded is the physical correspondent of an experience—an entity or “thing” whose properties are actual, rather than a “process” that performs some “function” over time. depicts the cause–effect structure unfolded from a simple eight-neuron network. All causal distinctions are represented (as vertices), but only a small fraction of the causal relations among them are shown (as edges, faces, and volumes).

The identity between an experience and a cause–effect structure is “explanatory” in the sense that every aspect of a particular phenomenal structure should be accounted for by the specific distinctions and relations of its corresponding cause–effect structure. A sketch of such an account is given in the next section for the feeling of spatial extendedness. Moreover, using the measure of integrated information, or Φ, one can quantify the extent to which the unfolded physical substrate exists as a single, irreducible entity that satisfies the essential properties of consciousness.

Much of the initial work in IIT has focused on two straightforward predictions: Φ should be high for the brain network that constitutes the physical substrate of consciousness (roughly speaking, the full NCC) and absent (or negligibly low) for neural networks that do not support consciousness. Moreover, the same physical substrate should satisfy the five essential properties when we are conscious and cease to do so when we lose consciousness.

In practice, we test these predictions using empirical approximations inspired by Φ. For example, the perturbational complexity index (Casali et al. 2013) coarsely quantifies how much a neural substrate is both differentiated and integrated. To be differentiated means having a large repertoire of possible states and is a prerequisite for being a structured and specific entity. To be integrated means behaving causally as a single entity, which is a reflection of being unitary and definite.

These predictions have been examined both experimentally and with computer models of brain architectures (Balduzzi and Tononi 2008; Tononi et al. 2016). The results so far indicate that neural substrates that support human consciousness—especially posterior cortical areas organized as “pyramids of grids”—have an anatomical connectivity appropriate for high Φ. By contrast, neural substrates that do not support consciousness, such as the cerebellum, have the wrong anatomy. Even though the cerebellum has five times more neurons than the cerebral cortex and is connected to sensory inputs, motor outputs, and indirectly to the cortex itself, its architecture is primarily feed-forward and modular, which rules out high values of Φ. Moreover, studies in healthy subjects during wakefulness, dreamless and dreaming sleep, and general anesthesia indicate that the loss and recovery of consciousness are associated with the breakdown and recovery of the capacity for information integration in the corticothalamic system (Casarotto et al. 2016; Tononi et al. 2016).


The specific properties of particular experiences: accounting for the way space feels

What about the specific properties that make every experience feel the particular way it does?—or at least that make it feel like an experience of a particular kind? Consider again the example above, of seeing a vast, empty canvas. The experience, like any other, is subjective, structured, specific, unitary, and definite. It also feels the specific way it does—namely, “spatially extended” as opposed to, for instance, “flowing in time.”In fact, most experiences involving both visual and body space feel extended. Can we account for the way these kinds of experiences feel in physical terms?

In this case, IIT begins again by identifying the fundamental phenomenal properties that make space feel the way it does—those that are true of every conceivable spatial experience (Haun and Tononi 2019). As introduced above, every spatial experience is composed of phenomenal distinctions that we call “spots.” In fact, the entire canvas of phenomenal space comprises countless spots of every shape and size, which are bound together by four types of phenomenal relations: “reflexivity” (every spot overlaps itself), “connection” (every spot partially overlaps some other spots), “fusion” (every spot is a fusion of connected spots and fuses with other connected spots), and “inclusion” (every spot includes and is included by other spots). Other properties of spatial experience can be characterized as phenomenal “substructures” composed of spots and their relations. These include “regions” of space, “locations” in space, “sizes” and “boundaries” of regions, “distances” between spots, and so on (Haun and Tononi 2019).

Assuming these properties do indeed capture what is specific about phenomenal extendedness, we should then try to provide a scientific account of each of them in physical terms. According to IIT, this means that we should identify a neural substrate whose unfolded causal powers—its cause–effect structure—correspond one-to-one to the phenomenal structure of spatial experiences.

As described in detail elsewhere (Haun and Tononi 2019), the phenomenal properties in question can be fully accounted for physically by the cause–effect structure unfolded from 2D grids constituted of neurons connected locally by lateral connections. That is, neurons arranged in grids display systematic patterns of cause and effect that can account for the phenomenal relations of extendedness (reflexivity, connection, fusion, and inclusion), while other substrates, such as networks of randomly connected neurons, cannot. Moreover, the cause–effect structure unfolded from a grid-like substrate satisfies these properties irrespective of whether units are active or not, as long as the units are ready to be turned on or off.

This account of spatial experience is supported by ample empirical evidence. For example, lesions in visual cortical areas produce not just extrinsic blindness, in the sense that patients do not detect objects in some portions of their visual field, but also an intrinsic loss of experienced space: subjectively, a region of visual space ceases to exist—it is simply “not there” (Pollen 1999; Hazelton et al. 2019). After a severe stroke, resection of one occipital lobe, or callosal disconnection, the contralateral half of experienced space disappears in both perception and imagination (Bisiach and Luzzatti 1978; Farah et al. 1992; Butter et al. 1997). In fact, because contralateral space does not exist subjectively, patients are not aware that anything is amiss and may only realize indirectly that something is not right (Sperry 1968; Gilhotra et al. 2002; Hazelton et al. 2019) [for additional evidence, see Haun and Tononi (2019)].

Several counterintuitive predictions also follow from this account. For example, (i) in cortical areas arranged in a grid-like manner, both active and inactive neurons should support spatial experience; (ii) changes in connectivity in these areas should warp spatial experience even in the absence of changes in activity; (iii) loss of lateral connections should produce a contraction of experienced space of which the subject is unaware (intrinsic scotomas); (iv) grid-like connectivity in occipital areas should support spatial experience devoid of visual qualities in subjects blind from birth (Cattaneo and Vecchi 2011); and (v) changes in the way space feels may be dissociable from changes in performance. The last prediction is illustrated in a companion paper (Grasso et al. 2021). By simulating simple neural networks inspired by the organization of cortical and subcortical circuits, we show that visual functions, such as fixating a target, can be performed equivalently by a grid-like substrate (with lateral connections) and by a map-like substrate (organized topographically but lacking lateral connections). Despite their functional equivalence, only the grid specifies a cause–effect structure that can account for spatial experience (Grasso et al. 2021).


Consciousness: what it does or what it is?

We have given an overview of how IIT pursues an objective account of subjective properties, using phenomenal space as a first example. Now let us reconsider the claim that the only way to study consciousness scientifically is by evaluating what we can report about experience—what we can do with it. What would be lost in a purely functional account of space? In a word, everything.

Take again the initial example of the screen and the flashed spots. From a strictly functionalist perspective, as advocated by Cohen and Dennett (2011), all there is to say objectively about the experience is what I can access and report at a given moment. As an experimental subject, I might simply report, “a vast, empty canvas” (1A), or “a dashed spot flashed over a background, slightly to the left” (1B), or “a couple of overlapping spots on the left” (1C), or “a spot including another on the right” (1D), or “five spots at seemingly random locations, which I can point out” (1E), or, finally, “many spots all over the canvas, can’t tell where each was and which overlapped” (1F). The investigators would conclude that this report in fact conveys all I am conscious of. It is all that is accessible to me at any given time as well as all that is amenable to a scientific account.

Indeed, any one of my statements above is certainly adequate to convey what I am experiencing to another human being. Unlike a painting by Jackson Pollock, the experience of a “vast, empty canvas” can be communicated with a message worth just a few bits of Shannon information. But the only reason the report is meaningful is because it can trigger a similar experience in most other human subjects. If they did not experience spatial extendedness in the first place, they would have no idea what I am talking about. The message may be short, but the experience that triggers it and that it evokes is an immense intrinsic structure—one that makes it feel spatial—even though I can only report a few of its components at a time (how could an entire structure be communicated at once?).

Consider distance as an example of this intrinsic structure. At any one time, if I am asked to attend to the distance between two dashed spots—say, the two in the top left—I can provide an adequate estimate. But I should also realize that to see any two dashed spots at a certain distance from each other, I must be experiencing all the spots that lie between them (although they are not dashed). Now consider that the image actually contains five dashed spots at seemingly random locations (which I can still report). There are 10 pairwise distances between the five spots as well as distances between each spot and the edges of the screen. I can certainly not report all of those distances, one by one, if the image is flashed briefly. Yet how could I see the spots located where they are if I did not see how far apart they are or how far from the edges of the screen? And how could I see how far apart they are if I did not see all the spots in between? For if those other spots were not there on the canvas, the distance would collapse; all distances would collapse; the very canvas—the feeling of space itself—would collapse.

In fact, even a single spot at the “focus of attention” already feels extended, like a “region” of space. And how could it feel like a region if it were not composed of many overlapping spots? Furthermore, how could it be experienced as “located” where it is if it were not included by all the other spots that make it feel precisely “there”? Finally, how could the vast canvas that composes the background of that spot feel like a vast canvas if it were not composed of a multitude of spots related among themselves in a particular way? And all those spots and relations, all those regions, locations, and distances are there for me to experience all at once as a vast, extended canvas—an immense spatial structure—even though I can only attend to and report individual spots sequentially, a few at a time.

In summary, there must be a reason why the canvas feels extended rather than, say, like the smell of vanilla. That reason must be the particular way the experience of the canvas is structured. In the case of space, the way experience is structured is at least in part decomposable through introspection—namely, based on the relations of reflexivity, connection, fusion, and inclusion. And once the subjective structure of spatial experience is characterized, albeit partially, we cannot leave it unexplained. Instead, we should try to account for it in objective, physical terms (Haun and Tononi 2019). We should identify a cause–effect structure that corresponds to the phenomenal structure of space in every aspect.

Doing so forces us to evaluate the neural substrate of experience with an eye not on the functions performed by different brain regions, but on the causal structures they support. In this light, it is instructive to revisit standard textbook accounts of spatial vision. The subjective feeling of space and the question of how it can be accounted for in neural terms are nowhere to be found. Instead, the textbooks focus exclusively on how the brain performs spatial functions—how it “represents” external space, operates coordinate transformations, and controls actions such as grasping and pointing. One learns what it takes to correctly grasp an object even though its projection on the retina changes when turning one’s eyes. But one never learns what it takes for the object to be experienced at a particular location in space. Revealingly, in their focus on spatial function rather than experience, the textbooks describe cortical areas in posterior cortex as “maps.” Maps are characterized by a “topographic” correspondence between nearby positions in the cortex and nearby positions in the retina and ultimately in the world. In this view, the neurons that matter are the ones that are activated, and lateral connections are responsible at most for some modulatory effects, although they constitute the bulk of synaptic contacts in posterior areas. At any given moment, inactive neurons do not count, nor do most lateral connections, because they are not “doing anything.” As argued here and elsewhere (Haun and Tononi 2019), however, far from doing nothing, inactive neurons contribute to the cause–effect structure of the system just like active neurons do. And in this way, together with their lateral connections, they are responsible for the experience of space. Accordingly, posterior cortical areas should be thought of as “grids,” not “maps” (Grasso et al. 2021).


Inference to a good explanation: from introspection and reason to neuroscience and back

If we wish to explain consciousness, then, we must account for its intrinsic structure, and to do so we should use all means at our disposal. The starting point must be introspection and reason: without them, we would not even realize there is something to be explained—in fact, we would not even get science started, let alone a science of consciousness. Empirical methods must then be brought in to complement introspection and reason and to extrapolate beyond their reach, in a systematic back-and-forth aiming at a good explanation of phenomenal properties in terms of physical properties.

As argued above, introspective access to one’s private experience—a kind of intrinsic self-report—is the horse that draws the cart of extrinsic report. Introspection and reason are also what allow us to ascribe similar experiences to beings that look and behave like us, and what justify the use of behavioral, functional, and neural correlates in the study of consciousness. Most importantly, introspection and reason allow us to identify properties of experience that must be accounted for in physical terms.

Consider a few examples. As I introspect my experience reading this page, I use reason to infer that I am conscious of the page even when I am not “self-reporting” about it (which is most of the time). To argue that I only see the page when I ask myself about it, or to conclude that either scenario is equally plausible, is nearly as silly as denying the existence of a world independent of my experience or holding that realism and solipsism are equivalent hypotheses. It is silly because realism explains things, while solipsism explains nothing. The same holds for the existence of my experience when I am not self-reporting—its explanatory power makes it the more reasonable conclusion. It is also consistent with empirical evidence: the neural correlates specific to experiencing faces, places, objects, and textures are similar whether we actively report what we see, we view scenes passively (Frässle et al. 2014; Tsuchiya et al. 2015), or we dream (Siclari et al. 2017).

Similarly, it is reasonable to infer that the feeling of extendedness remains largely the same even when I am not self-reporting, that every spot is where it belongs—at its specific location and distance from every other spot—whether I introspect or not. By simple reasoning, I can infer that for a spot to appear where it appears, there must be countless other spots around it that are related to it in specific ways, and for a distance to be experienced as a distance, it must itself be composed of many overlapping spots.

Of course, even at their best, introspection and reason have obvious limitations. For example, attention, working memory, and reasoning (broadly understood as mental manipulation) are largely selective and sequential. At every moment, I can only focus on and hold in mind some aspect of an experience—such as the distance between two spots—and then, say, compare it to another distance. Being able to introspect through attention is critical to access the structure of experience and to reason about it, but at any given moment, my access remains extremely restricted. Introspection is limited in many other ways beyond its selective and sequential features. For example, I cannot penetrate the structure of experienced space down to its smallest components by introspection alone (Haun and Tononi 2019). Furthermore, introspecting the structural properties of other experiences, such as those of a musical chord, is much harder. When it comes to colors and sounds, it seems impossible to introspect any structure at all. And of course, the very act of attending changes what is experienced to some extent. But such limitations simply reflect a truism in science—that every source of evidence has limitations.

Despite their limitations, introspection and reason are the essential tools to bootstrap the scientific study of consciousness—they provide what needs to be explained and highlight its intrinsic structural properties. But then, in order to achieve a good explanation, we must resort to neuroscience. By now we have overwhelming evidence about the strict dependence of experience on the brain. We know that certain neural substrates, but not others, are essential for us to be conscious. We also know that certain brain regions, but not others, are responsible for the specific contents of experience—space, objects, colors, sounds, and so on. We can thus infer that there should be a physical explanation for why certain substrates can support consciousness and others cannot. And there should be a physical explanation for why every experience is structured the way it is.

In the end, a good account of consciousness will require inferences and extrapolations based on a systematic, complementary back-and-forth between introspection, reason, and neuroscientific evidence. Strategically, it seems appropriate to begin with properties of experience that are most amenable to introspection. This is precisely why the feeling of extendedness was chosen for a first attempt at accounting for specific subjective properties in objective, physical terms. First, spatial experiences are pervasive: almost all we see and feel with our body is experienced as spatially extended. Second, and most important, we can at least partially introspect the phenomenal structure of spatial experience: we can attend to spots, their overlaps, and so on, and do so “anywhere” in space. In other words, the intrinsic structure of spatial experience is as “accessible” as we can hope, albeit in a sequential manner due to the limitations of attention, working memory, and executive functions. This accessibility makes it possible to characterize the structure of phenomenal space explicitly, so that we can more easily identify a physical correspondent. Third, in the case of spatial experience, we can suggest a natural candidate as a neural substrate—namely, grid-like areas in posterior cortex—so that the correspondence can be assessed empirically. Finally, there is a likely explanation for the relative accessibility of the intrinsic structure of spatial experiences: our brain can count on powerful mechanisms of spatial attention, which are mediated by changes in excitability conveyed along feedback connections from high-level to low-level visual areas.

The intrinsic structural properties of experienced time and objects can also be partially introspected, although perhaps not as easily and thoroughly as those of space, and ongoing work aims at accounting for them in physical terms. Other contents of experience, however, are much harder to decompose through introspection, even though we realize that they must be structured. For example, take the first chord in Haydn’s “Creation.” I realize that to sound the way it does, the auditory experience I am having is highly structured, but I am simply unable to put that phenomenal structure into words—it is largely ineffable. A potential explanation is that in this case, unlike the case of space, we lack attentional mechanisms that would allow us to use introspection to dissect the distinctions and relations that compose the chord. Or take the black color of the canvas. No matter how hard I try, all I can say is that the color looks imperscrutably black. Its quality is cognitively inaccessible, but it is certainly experienced. For such cases, a scientific approach might start not from introspection but by unfolding the cause–effect structure of neural circuits known to support the experience of colors.


Conclusion

Much has been gained through a scientific, objective analysis of objective correlates of consciousness. Behavioral correlates are invaluable in everyday life and in the clinic. Functional correlates, based on what we can access and report of our experiences, are necessary for dissecting consciousness and its contents. Neural correlates are critical for discovering the substrate of consciousness in the brain, both of consciousness as a whole and of its various contents.

Many argue that these objective correlates of consciousness are all that can be explained and all that should be explained. Phenomenal properties either do not exist at all, are illusory, or exceed the boundaries of science. Such claims commit the fallacy of misplaced objectivity: they assume that only objective properties should and can be accounted for objectively through science. However, consciousness is about being—not just about doing. While a scientific account of consciousness must be given in objective terms, the object of the account must be its subjective properties. What needs to be explained scientifically is what experience is intrinsically, not just what we can do with it extrinsically. And its properties must be explained; otherwise the way experience feels would turn out to be magical rather than physical.

As briefly summarized here, IIT attempts to account for the intrinsic, subjective properties of consciousness in strictly physical terms—both for the essential properties of every experience and for the specific properties of particular experiences. The tools of IIT provide a way to unfold the cause–effect structure of a physical substrate, such as different brain regions in a particular activity state. The properties of that unfolded substrate can then be examined to establish whether they can account for the essential properties of consciousness. Doing so can explain why certain brain regions support consciousness and others do not, and why they do so in certain activity states and not in others. Furthermore, this approach suggests that certain brain regions, but not others, can support specific phenomenal properties—e.g. that grid-like regions of the brain can support the extendedness of spatial experiences.

According to IIT, even the blackness of black and the painfulness of pain correspond to cause–effect substructures, although we struggle to decompose them from the inside using introspection. But if the central identity of IIT is correct, all quality is structure: all phenomenal properties, including black and pain, are properties of cause–effect structures. Black and pain, too, will have to be accounted for in physical terms—as particular substructures specified by certain cliques of neurons.

Once it is properly appreciated, rather than ignored, the immense structural richness of every human experience—including that of an empty screen—can be a fertile ground for a scientific, objective account. IIT offers a framework that was explicitly developed to pursue this goal. Regardless of the framework, understanding consciousness scientifically means accounting for experience itself—why it is present or absent and why specific experiences feel the way they do. It should be done, and it can be done.


Comparing stimulus-evoked and spontaneous response of the face-selective multi-units in the human posterior fusiform gyrus

Rina Schwartz, Camille Rozier, Tal Seidel Malkinson, Katia Lehongre, Claude Adam, Virginie Lambrecq, Vincent Navarro, Lionel Naccache et al. — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8520048, CC BY 4.0.

The stimulus-evoked neural response is a widely explored phenomenon. Conscious awareness is associated in many cases with the corresponding selective stimulus-evoked response. For example, conscious awareness of a face stimulus is associated with or accompanied by stimulus-evoked activity in the fusiform face area (FFA). In addition to the stimulus-evoked response, spontaneous (i.e. task-unrelated) activity in the brain is also abundant. Notably, spontaneous activity is considered unconscious. For example, spontaneous activity in the FFA is not associated with conscious awareness of a face. The question is: what is the difference at the neural level between stimulus-evoked activity in a case that this activity is associated with conscious awareness of some content (e.g. activity in the FFA in response to fully visible face stimuli) and spontaneous activity in that same region of the brain? To answer this question, in the present study, we had a rare opportunity to record two face-selective multi-units in the vicinity of the FFA in a human patient. We compared multi-unit face-selective task-evoked activity with spontaneous prestimulus and a resting-state activity. We found that when activity was examined over relatively long temporal windows (e.g. 100–200 ms), face-selective stimulus-evoked firing in the recorded multi-units was much higher than the spontaneous activity. In contrast, when activity was examined over relatively short windows, we found many cases of high firing rates within the spontaneous activity that were comparable to stimulus-evoked activity. Our results thus indicate that the sustained activity is what might differentiate between stimulus-evoked activity that is associated with conscious awareness and spontaneous activity.

Keywords: spontaneous activity, stimulus-evoked activity, face-selective activity, conscious awareness, multi-unit recording in humans, Fusiform Face Area (FFA)


Introduction

The stimulus-evoked neural response—an increase of neural activity following stimulus presentation—is probably the most robust and well-explored phenomenon related to neural processing (Friston 2005). This phenomenon is universal and can be observed across a variety of brain regions, modalities (e.g. visual and auditory), and species. The stimulus-evoked neural response can additionally be detected using various recording and imaging methods [e.g. intracranial and scalp electrophysiological recordings, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)]. Conscious awareness is associated in many cases with a corresponding selective stimulus-evoked response. For example, conscious awareness about a face stimulus is likely always associated with activity in the fusiform face area (FFA) (Kanwisher 2017). Note that there is still no agreement regarding whether stimulus-evoked responses in specific regions (such as the FFA) contribute directly to conscious awareness (Block 2007; Boly et al. 2017) or if conscious awareness is achieved, for example, by global neuronal workspace integration (Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Mashour et al. 2020).

An additional omnipresent phenomenon is the spontaneous (or ongoing, intrinsic, resting-state) activity—the type of neural activity that occurs constantly in the background and that is not triggered by any stimuli (Raichle et al. 2001). One of the first demonstrations of spontaneous activity was the electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings done by Hans Berger (Berger 1929). Renewed interest in spontaneous activity was sparked by the pioneering works of Arieli, Grinvald, Tsodyks and colleagues (Arieli et al. 1995, Tsodyks et al. 1999) conducted in the early visual cortex in anesthetized cats. Examination of co-variation of spontaneous activity from two or more neural sources gave rise to the resting-state functional connectivity approach—one of the most prominent research directions today (Biswal et al. 1995; Damoiseaux et al. 2006; Mantini et al. 2007; Bullmore and Sporns 2009; Yeo et al. 2011; Lurie et al. 2019; Marron et al. 2020). The relationship between spontaneous activity and conscious awareness is complex. In certain scenarios, spontaneous activity has been shown to modulate cognitive behavior in domains such as visual perception (Hesselmann et al.2008b; Hahamy et al. 2020), creative thinking (Broday-Dvir and Malach 2021), and volitional decision-making (Schurger et al. 2012). Spontaneous activity has been also suggested to play a role in consciousness (Northoff and Lamme 2020), for example, by integrating information across brain regions (He and Raichle 2009) or across brain regions (i.e. space) and time (Northoff 2013; Northoff and Huang 2017). However, the spontaneous neural activity per se is unconscious because a person does not know when the spontaneous wave is at its minimum or maximum in a given brain region. For example, while the spontaneous activity fluctuates several times per minute in the FFA and the parahippocampal place area (PPA) high-level visual areas (Nir et al. 2006), we do not have a constantly alternating experience of a face and a scene.

The question is what is the difference at the neural level between stimulus-evoked activity in a case that this activity is associated with conscious awareness of some content and spontaneous activity? In other words, are there any properties of the neural signal that may explain whether we are consciously aware of the stimulus or not? Surprisingly, to date, there have been few studies that compared stimulus-evoked responses and spontaneous activity, and they do not provide sufficient answers. One prominent functional MRI (fMRI) study (Nir et al. 2006) demonstrated that the amplitude of spontaneous fluctuations in the FFA and the PPA was comparable to the stimulus-evoked responses. However, because fMRI measures hemodynamic activity, which is only an indirect measure of a neural response (Logothetis et al. 2001), it is challenging to extrapolate this result to neural activity. Two additional studies compared single-unit stimulus-evoked and spontaneous activity in the cat primary visual areas (Arieli et al. 1995) and the human primary auditory cortex (Nir et al. 2008). Both of these studies showed that stimulus-evoked activity was associated with higher firing rates compared to spontaneous activity. But these studies did not focus on the question of whether periods of high firing rates can still be found in spontaneous activity. In addition, investigations in these studies have been conducted in primary cortices, regions that are unlikely to contribute directly to conscious awareness (Dehaene et al. 2006; Watanabe et al. 2011).

The present intracranial study was conducted with patients who underwent clinical monitoring for epileptic seizures. We had a rare opportunity to record multi-unit activity (MUA) of two strongly face-selective multi-units located in the posterior fusiform gyrus of one patient. As we reported previously (Axelrod et al. 2019), the multi-units were located in the vicinity of the FFA. As the control region, activity in the planum temporale (i.e. auditory cortex) was recorded in an additional patient. The present investigation included a task-based experiment with face stimuli as well as a resting-state session. This setup and design allowed us to compare electrophysiological face-selective stimulus-evoked responses, spontaneous activity that preceded face stimulus (i.e. fixation period), and spontaneous activity during resting-state session in a high-level visual area of a human brain.


Methods

Detailed information about the patient with face-selective multi-units, recording procedures, and stimulus-evoked paradigm have been provided in detail in supplementary materials of our previous publication (Axelrod et al. 2019). Here, we provide the most essential information.


Information about patients

The face-selective activity was recorded in a 26-year-old female subject (i.e. patient). For clinical epilepsy seizure monitoring, the patient was implanted with depth electrodes in the right occipital and temporal lobes. The experiment with the control region was conducted in a 21-year-old male patient for whom depth electrodes were implanted in the left temporal, parietal, and frontal lobes. For both patients, no epileptic activity was found in the regions of interest of the present investigation (i.e. right posterior fusiform gyrus in the patient with face-selective multi-units and left planum temporale in the control patient). Note that the location of the electrodes in such a procedure is determined solely by clinical criteria. The data were recorded during the subjects’ hospitalization in the Epilepsy ward of Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital in accordance with approval and guidelines of the local ethics committee (CPP Paris VI, INSERM C11-16), with the same clinical setup as the previous intracranial studies conducted in Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital (El Karoui et al. 2014; Babo-Rebelo et al. 2016; Corlier et al. 2016; Chammat et al. 2017).


Recording setup

Depth platinum macro-electrodes (AdTech, Wisconsin) of the Behnke-Fried type 5 were used for stereotactic EEG recording. The electrodes of interest for the present study were implanted in the right posterior fusiform gyrus (the patient with face-selective multi-units) and the left planum temporale (the control patient). Eight platinum–iridium microwires were located at the tip of this electrode (protruded about 5 mm beyond the macro-electrode). Note, that there is no way to determine the exact location of microwires in human electrophysiological recordings (Self et al. 2016); therefore, we describe only the approximate location of the microwires (magenta arrow). In our previous study (Axelrod et al. 2019), we established that the microwires that recorded the face-selective activity were in the vicinity of the FFA. The microwire recording (the focus of this paper) was conducted using the Atlas recording system (Neuralynx Inc., Tucson, AZ). The microwire recording sampling rate was 32 kHz and the online band-pass filter was 0.1–4000 Hz.


Experimental paradigms

The experiment was conducted in a quiet room in the hospital ward. Stimuli were projected on a Dell Precision M4600 laptop (15.6-inch display, 1366 × 768 resolution) using MATLAB with Psychtoolbox-3 (Brainard 1997). The patients were sitting ∼50 cm from the monitor.


Resting-state session

The standard resting-state paradigm was used (Fox et al. 2006). The duration of the resting-state session was 5 minutes and 50 seconds. During this time, the patients remained with their eyes closed. They were also asked to not think about anything specific and in particular to not imagine anything. No formal questionnaires regarding imagery were issued after the resting-state session.


Stimulus-evoked experiment

The experiment included color images of faces (120 trials), city views (hereinafter referred as “scenes”; 120 trials), and everyday objects (40 trials). Two types of faces were presented, familiar and unfamiliar. Faces familiar to patients were famous faces (French public figures), and faces not familiar to the patient were non-French public figures. Familiar and unfamiliar scenes were presented as well. Familiar scenes were city views of Paris, and unfamiliar scenes were views of cities from outside of France. The size of the stimuli was about 11° visual angles. Each stimulus was shown for 1 second and was preceded by a 1.2-second fixation. The behavioral task was to indicate whether the image was familiar or not. The main motivation behind this study was to compare the MUA neural properties of face-selective stimulus-evoked response and spontaneous activity. Because we were interested in the neural response to the stimulus category, we combined familiar and unfamiliar stimuli, resulting in two conditions: “faces” and “scenes.” The scenes condition was only used only to independently establish face-selectivity. Activity preceding the faces stimuli was analyzed as well (referred to below as “prestimulus activity”). The objects category was not included in the analysis because an additional control condition did not contribute any new information and because there were many fewer trials with objects stimuli, compared to the number of trials in the faces and scenes conditions.


Data analysis

Data analysis was done in MATLAB using FieldTrip (Oostenveld et al. 2011), Chronux toolbox (http://chronux.org/) (Mitra 2007), wave_clus (Quiroga et al. 2004), and Matlab Offline Spike Sorting (https://github.com/JoaquinMansilla/Spike-Sorter) toolboxes as well as custom code (Axelrod 2014). Spike detection and sorting were executed using a standard procedure for analyzing MUA recordings in humans (Quiroga et al. 2005; Reddy et al. 2015; Kornblith et al. 2017). Before performing the MUA analysis, the Local Field Potential (LFP) signals of the microwires were inspected to minimize the possibility of interference from local epileptic activity. No local epileptic activity was found. Spike detection and spike sorting were done using wave_clus toolbox. The average of the cluster did not exceed 50 μV in either of the units, and they were therefore classified as MUA. To validate the results of spike-detection and spike-sorting, we conducted two types of control analysis. One validation approach was to use our main analysis pipeline (wave_clus toolbox) to conduct spike-detection with three different threshold values (stdmin = 4, stdmin = 4.5 and stdmin = 5). Another validation approach was to use a different software package for spike-detection and spike-sorting (Matlab Offline Spike Sorting toolbox and custom procedure). The results we obtained using both validation approaches were similar to the results using our main analysis pipeline.

The entire stimulus-evoked experiment was 11 minutes and 23 seconds long. The recording of this session was split into two parts. The first part of the recording had an equal duration to that of the resting-state session (5 minutes and 50 seconds). Our main analyses were conducted using the data of the first part. The second part was comprised of the remaining data, which was allocated to be used to establish selectivity using independent data (Kriegeskorte et al. 2009). Additionally, this second part of the data was used to determine the point of beginning, peak, and end of modulation of the faces condition compared to baseline. The data of the stimulus-evoked experiment were split into epochs, with a baseline (i.e. prestimulus) period of 500 ms and a trial period of 1250 ms.

In order to compare the distribution of firing rates during the faces condition, the prestimulus activity, and the resting state, instantaneous firing rates were calculated by smoothing the binary spike train with a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 80 ms [in accordance with previous similar analysis (Nir et al. 2008)]. The firing rates for the faces condition were calculated for the periods of significant modulation compared to baseline. Beginning and end points of these periods were obtained using independent data (see above). To obtain the relative proportion of each histogram bin, the histogram was normalized for each condition, based on the number of instantaneous firing rates extracted.

Comparison of power spectral density between conditions was conducted using Fast Fourier Transform (Matlab fft function). Qualitatively similar results were obtained when the power spectrum was calculated using multitaper technique (mtspectrumc chronux toolbox function). The spectrum was calculated for each trial of each condition and then averaged (for similar approach, see Mazzoni et al. 2008). Segment duration for all conditions was set to 500 ms to match the prestimulus duration. In the faces condition, the onset of the segment was the time of peak modulation for that unit relative to the baseline. The peak value for each multi-unit was calculated using independent data (see above). For the resting state, random periods were sampled (the results were the same independent of the samples used).

The analysis presented in aimed to examine the durations of periods of resting-state activity that have higher firing rates compared to the stimulus-evoked response. This analysis has five steps. First, a duration of the time window to be used was defined. Throughout, we used lengths from 2 to 250 ms. Second, windows of this size were selected from the binary spike train for each of the faces stimulus-evoked trials (n = 70) and an equal number of resting-state windows. Third, we calculated the sum of spikes for each window, resulting in a vector of firing rates. This resulted in 70 (faces stimulus-evoked) + 70 (resting-state) = 140 values. Fourth, this vector was ranked in descending order. Fifth, we calculated the percentage of resting-state windows in the predefined percentiles of top ranked values (e.g. for the 70 windows with the highest firing rates for the 50% percentile, see below). Values on Y axis in reflect the resulting percentage of resting-state windows. The onset of the time windows (regardless of the window’s length) for the stimulus-evoked response condition was the time of peak modulation for the faces condition for that unit relative to the baseline. The peak value for each multi-unit was calculated using independent data (see above). The onsets of time windows in the resting-state data were selected randomly. In order to have an equal number of windows for the stimulus-evoked response and the resting-state data, we bootstrapped the resting-state windows by repeating the analysis 1000 times and only then averaging the results. In our analysis, we examined four different percentiles of the top-firing rates (i.e. sum of spikes within window). We examined the percentage of the resting-state windows among the top 5%, top 20%, top 35%, and top 50% of values. For example, for the top 5%, we asked what percentage of resting-state windows were within the top 7 (140 × 5% = 7) windows with the highest firing rates. The analysis comparing faces stimulus-evoked activity and prestimulus activity was conducted in the same way but without boostrapping.


Results

During the resting-state session (5 minutes and 50 seconds), patients were asked to keep their eyes closed, not to think about anything in particular, and to not imagine anything. The stimulus-evoked experiment included static images of familiar (i.e. famous) and unfamiliar faces. In addition, the experiment included images of familiar and unfamiliar city views (referred to below as “scenes”). The scenes condition was used only to establish face selectivity and was not used in our main analyses. Each stimulus was preceded by a fixation period (referred to below as “prestimulus activity”). The behavioral task was to indicate whether the image was familiar or not (see the “Methods” section for more details). The performance of the patient with face-selective multi-units was almost perfect for faces (familiar faces = 100%, unfamiliar faces = 95%) but worse for scenes (familiar scenes = 95%, unfamiliar scenes = 22%). The low performance for unfamiliar scenes was because the patient mistakenly thought that the scene should be indicated as “familiar” even if it only resembles a familiar scene. The performance of the control patient was high for both faces (familiar faces = 99%, unfamiliar faces = 85%) and scenes (familiar scenes = 94%, unfamiliar scenes = 93%). As we were interested in the stimulus-selective response in general, we combined familiar and unfamiliar stimuli, resulting in two conditions: “faces” and “scenes”.

The averaged stimulus-evoked responses (based on the second part of the stimulus-evoked experiment) are shown in. In multi-units 1 and 2, we see that faces elicited strong stimulus-evoked modulation compared to baseline. Additionally, faces elicited a much higher stimulus-evoked response compared to the scenes condition (i.e. face-selectivity). Statistically, the activity in the faces condition was beyond the baseline in multi-unit 1 [the period between 84 and 751 ms after stimulus onset, P < 0.001, two-tailed nonparametric cluster-based permutations (Maris and Oostenveld 2007)] and in multi-unit 2 (the period between 91 and 768 ms after stimulus onset, P < 0.001). The peak values of the faces condition relative to baseline (i.e. the highest t-values) were at 176 ms from stimulus onset (multi-unit 1) and at 173 ms from stimulus onset (multi-unit 2). In addition to beyond baseline responses in the faces condition, in multi-unit 2, the activity increased beyond the baseline in the scenes condition (the period between 131 and 483 ms after stimulus onset, P < 0.001; peak value at 330 ms from stimulus onset). Comparing the faces and scenes conditions revealed a face-selective response in multi-unit 1 ([99 ms:1000 ms period, P < 0.001) and multi-unit 2 ([107 ms:733 ms period, P < 0.001). Overall, these results establish high face selectivity of the two recorded multi-units. In the control multi-unit, the were no periods of beyond-baseline modulation for neither the faces nor the scenes condition. In addition, there were no periods of higher activity for faces compared to scenes (i.e. no face-selectivity).

Next, we proceed to the main goal of the present investigation, comparing face-selective stimulus-evoked and spontaneous activity (i.e. resting-state and prestimulus activity). Note that all of the following analyses that included stimulus-evoked conditions were conducted using data that were independent from those used to establish selectivity (see above). In, we show representative examples of instantaneous firing rate traces of the stimulus-evoked experiment and resting-state session, recorded from face-selective multi-unit 1. Data were smoothed with a Gaussian window of FWHM of 80 ms (Nir et al. 2008). This figure illustrates that in many cases faces elicited strong firing rate modulation at the level of single stimuli. The firing rates preceding the stimulus and during the resting state were weaker, but interestingly, there were also occasional, relatively short periods of strong firing rates comparable to those of the face-evoked activity.

To take a quantitative look at the data, we first compared the average firing rates of the segments of face-evoked activity, prestimulus activity, and the resting-state activity. The segments of stimulus-evoked activity were taken from the periods (in time) of the beyond-baseline modulation of the faces condition calculated on independent data (see above). We found that for multi-units 1 and 2, the average stimulus-evoked firing rate in the faces condition was much higher compared to resting-state activity and prestimulus activity periods: multi-unit 1 faces mean = 48.6 spikes/second, SEM = 0.15; multi-unit 1 fixation mean = 15.9 spikes/second, SEM = 0.09; multi-unit 1 resting-state mean = 14.95 spikes/second, SEM = 0.03; multi-unit 2 faces mean = 48.21 spikes/second, SEM = 0.16; multi-unit 2 fixation mean = 14.7 spikes/second, SEM = 0.09; multi-unit 2 resting-state mean = 10.38 spikes/second, SEM = 0.023. In contrast, in the control multi-unit, there was no major difference between the faces condition, the resting-state session, and the prestimulus activity: faces mean = 13.6 spikes/second, SEM = 0.06; prestimulus activity mean = 11.79 spikes/second, SEM = 0.06; resting-state mean = 12.5 spikes/second, SEM = 0.02.

Next, to explore the firing rate profile in more detail, we compared the distribution of instantaneous firing rates of the three conditions (i.e. face-selective evoked response, prestimulus activity, and the resting-state activity). The results are shown in. For multi-units 1 and 2, we found a reversed pattern when comparing the faces condition to the resting-state and prestimulus activities: the low firing rates were abundant in the resting-state (gray bars) and prestimulus activities (blue) but were uncommon in the faces condition (red bars); in contrast, the high firing rates were abundant in the faces condition but were almost absent in the resting-state and prestimulus activities. In contrast, in the control multi-unit, there was no major difference between the patterns of activity of the three conditions.

At the next stage, we compared the power spectral density between conditions. The power spectrum was calculated for single trials, and then, the result was averaged. In multi-units 1 and 2, we can see the major differences in power spectrum across the frequencies between stimulus-evoked face condition and two spontaneous conditions. In contrast, for the control multi-unit, we do not see any differences between conditions in power spectrum.

We have already established that the selective (i.e. face-selective) stimulus-evoked response is characterized by a higher firing rate compared to resting-state activity. But in the illustrative example in, we observed that periods with high firing rates could be also found during spontaneous activity. In the quantitative analyses that follow, we explored how probable it was that the firing rate during the resting state was higher than during face condition. In contrast to the previous analyses, the present analysis was conducted using binary spike train data (i.e. the data without Gaussian smoothing), permitting us to investigate how the length of time over which the activity is examined influences the results. In the analysis presented below, we compare stimulus-evoked face-selective responses with resting-state activity. Comparing stimulus-evoked face-selective responses and prestimulus activity produced qualitatively similar results. The analysis was conducted for a time window that varied in length from 2 to 250 ms. For each of the stimulus-evoked trials (70 trials, in the faces condition) and for an equal number of resting-state time windows, we calculated the sum of spikes over a given window. This resulted in a vector of 140 values. Then, we calculated the percentage of the resting-state values among predefined percentage of the highest values (values on Y axis in). Specifically, we examined the percentage of resting-state windows among the top 5%, 20%, 35% and 50% of windows with the highest firing rates. For more details, see the ‘Methods’ section.

The results of the analysis are shown in. For multi-units 1 and 2, we observed the following: (i) the longer the time-window, the less likely it was to encounter firing rates from the resting-state session that were comparable to the face-selective response; (ii) proportion of resting-state time windows with a firing-rate comparable to that of the selective stimulus-evoked response depended on the percentage threshold used. Critically, with short windows, even for the top 5% of windows (red trace), some resting-state windows were comparable to the evoked face-selective firing rate; (iii) and for the longer time windows (e.g. longer than ∼50−100 ms for 20% threshold and below or longer than ∼150−200 ms for thresholds 35%−50%), there were few resting-state time windows with a firing rate comparable to that of the selective stimulus-evoked response. In contrast, for the control multi-unit, a completely different pattern emerged, such that the percent of resting-state windows with higher firing rates fluctuates around 50% (regardless of the percentage threshold used).

Finally, a possible concern is that during the stimulus-evoked experiment, the subject was not attentive to all stimuli, resulting in a lower evoked response for these “missed” trials. But this is likely not the case because the behavioral performance of the patient in the faces condition was almost perfect. Yet, to rule out even a minimal potential confound, we repeated all our analyses while we excluded two face trials that were categorized incorrectly. The results from this repeated analysis were indistinguishable from those reported earlier. Thus, our results are unlikely to be explained by inattention to stimuli.


Discussion

In the present investigation, we compared multi-unit face-selective stimulus-evoked and spontaneous responses in two face-selective multi-units in the human posterior fusiform gyrus. We found that on average, face-selective stimulus-evoked firing rates were much higher than spontaneous activity. However, examining activity over varying time windows revealed a more nuanced picture. Specifically, we found that when the activity was examined over a relatively short time window (e.g. 50 ms), many periods of spontaneous activity were characterized by high firing rates, comparable to stimulus-evoked firing. Our results indicate that conscious awareness of a stimulus might be associated with a sustained response in the selective region. Below, we discuss our findings in more detail.

Spontaneous (or ongoing) neural activity is one of the most enigmatic phenomena related to brain processing (Moutard et al. 2015; Raichle 2015). Spontaneous activity happens constantly and is responsible for most of the brain’s energy consumption (Raichle and Mintun 2006). Therefore, it is of primary importance to understand the role and functional principles of spontaneous activity. An important property of spontaneous activity is that its fluctuations are unconscious. Conversely, stimulus-evoked activity may or may not be associated with conscious percept. For example, according to the taxonomy proposed by Dehaene and colleagues (Dehaene et al. 2006), stimulus-evoked activity will be associated with conscious percept (in case of long-distance reverberation) or will not be associated with conscious percept (“preconscious” mode: in case of a local reverberation or “subliminal” mode: in case of no reverberation). Accordingly, here we asked how the stimulus-evoked neural response that is associated with conscious percept differs from the spontaneous response that is not associated with the conscious percept. In the past, this question has been only partially addressed, likely because of the lack of an appropriate experimental setup. That is, compared to several previous studies (Arieli et al. 1995; Nir et al. 2006), our experimental setup was particularly suitable for addressing this question because (i) the multi-unit recording that we used is a direct measure of neural activity, in contrast to fMRI which is an indirect measure (Logothetis et al. 2001); (ii) conducting the experiment with a human subject allows us to know definitively the conscious perception of the participant; and (iii) the recording in our study was conducted in the FFA—the high-level visual region that may directly contribute to conscious awareness of a specific content (i.e. a face) (Block 2007; Boly et al. 2017).

Our results can be divided into two parts. First, in line with the results of one earlier study that recorded activity in the auditory cortex of human patients (Nir et al. 2008), we found that when activity in the FFA was examined over relatively long temporal windows (100–200 ms and longer) or large temporal Gaussian smoothing (FWHM = 80 ms) was used, stimulus-evoked activity was much higher than spontaneous activity (both resting-state and prestimulus activities). Second, most interestingly, our finding was that when the activity was examined over relatively short windows (50 ms and smaller, depending on the threshold used), resting-state activity was often high and comparable to stimulus-evoked activity. Critically, this result cannot be explained by low responses during stimulus-evoked trials because (i) we used the highest level of stimulus-evoked activity as the onset of our time-windows and (ii) when the window length was 20 ms and below, the windows of the spontaneous activity could be found within even the top 5% of the windows with the highest firing rates. Also note that during the stimulus-evoked experiment the participant attended to the stimuli, as was reflected by her excellent performance in the behavioral task. Taken together, our results indicate that the important difference between stimulus-evoked activity that is associated with a conscious percept and the spontaneous activity that is not associated with a conscious percept might be how long the activity is sustained. That being said, the present result cannot establish whether the stimulus-evoked sustained activity in the FFA directly contributes to conscious awareness (i.e. serves as a neural correlate of consciousness). Interestingly, while in the present study we tested spontaneous activity that was not associated with conscious content awareness, there has also been extensive research that examined stimulus-evoked activity that is not associated with conscious awareness about some content (Dehaene and Changeux 2011; van Gaal and Lamme 2011; Hesselmann 2013; Axelrod et al. 2015a). For example, subjectively invisible stimuli of faces elicit an evoked response in the FFA (Sterzer et al. 2008; Fahrenfort et al. 2012). From a theoretical point of view, it has been suggested that the main difference between unconscious and conscious evoked-activity might be that only the latter is reverberative and sustained (Dehaene and Naccache 2001; Dehaene et al. 2006; Lamme 2006). To this extent, our results point to potentially similar mechanisms of unconscious spontaneous and unconscious stimulus-evoked activity.

A potential concern that can be raised regarding our findings is whether the participant was engaged in facial imagery during the resting-state session. Indeed, a recent study that also recorded single- and multi-unit face-selective activity reported similarity in firing rate patterns during perception and imagery of a face (Khuvis et al. 2021). However, we think that facial imagery is unlikely a major factor that could explain our results. First, our participant got clear instructions before the resting-state session to not think about anything in particular, including to not be engaged in imagery. Second, neural activity that can be measured during imagery is by definition weaker compared to sensory stimuli (e.g. O’Craven and Kanwisher 2000). Accordingly, studies that examine neural activity for imagery of faces adopt special procedures to achieve reliable neural activity. For example, when visual stimuli are shown prior to the imagery stage, the participants are explicitly asked to remember fine facial details like unique color and facial expression (Khuvis et al. 2021). Another approach to facilitate imagery is to use only a few facial identities and to show visual stimuli immediately prior to the imagery task (Dijkstra et al. 2018). Thus, in our case, even if the participant had a brief, fleeting thought relating to a person, it is unlikely that this would have resulted in reliable neural activity in the FFA. Third, we showed that the resting-state and stimulus-evoked patterns of activity were distinct (i.e. a sustained response in the stimulus-evoked case and a brief response in the resting-state; see example in). Had imagery occurred during the resting-state session, the patterns of the activity during resting state would have appeared similar to the stimulus-evoked activity. Finally, according to our results, for the window length of 50 ms, we found ∼25% of the resting-state windows with activity comparable to stimulus-evoked activity. Even if facial imagery occurred occasionally during the resting-state session, it is highly unlikely that it occurred so frequently (i.e. many dozens of times during a 6-minute period). Note that similar to the research of mind-wandering and self-generated cognition (Smallwood and Schooler 2015), there is no straightforward solution on how to establish the extent of face imagery during the 6-minute resting-state session. One possibility is to include a formal questionnaire after the resting-state session regarding potential imagery of a face (Diaz et al. 2013; Gorgolewski et al. 2014)—the procedure that was not implemented in our study. However, reliability of the responses in such a case can be questioned because the participant might not remember at the end of the session what was going through their mind throughout the entire period. Another possibility is to include thought probes throughout the resting-state session (e.g. Robertson et al. 1997; Axelrod et al. 2015b). However, while frequent probes might disrupt the spontaneous nature of a thought, infrequent probes suffer from the limitation we discussed above with regard to the questionnaire at the end of the session. Overall, there is an inherent difficulty to establish reliable imagery phenomenology in a spontaneous experiment. However, as we pointed out above, facial imagery was unlikely a strong factor impacting our results.

There have been two main directions in the investigation of spontaneous activity. The first is the so-called resting-state—a continuous session without any task (Raichle et al. 2001). In the field of consciousness research, resting-state spontaneous activity has been linked to and is usually investigated in the context of level or state of consciousness. In particular, spontaneous activity has been shown to vary across conscious states, such as anesthesia (Barttfeld et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2016), sleep (Tagliazucchi and Laufs 2014), or disorder of consciousness states (Cao et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020). Theoretically, according to the Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC), the role of spontaneous activity is to integrate across space and time, thus creating a situation of a neural predisposition of consciousness (Northoff and Huang 2017; Northoff and Lamme 2020). Note, however, that the focus of the present work was stimulus conscious awareness but not conscious state; therefore, our results are not directly related to this body of research. The second research direction has been the influence and interaction of the spontaneous prestimulus activity on the subsequent stimulus-evoked activity (Sadaghiani et al. 2010). In a seminal study conducted more than a decade ago, Hesselmann and colleagues showed that higher prestimulus activity in the FFA increased the probability that the Rubin face-vase illusion stimulus is perceived as a face (Hesselmann et al. 2008b) (for related findings for other brain regions and modalities, see Hesselmann et al. 2008a; Sadaghiani et al. 2010). Since then, more studies demonstrated that prestimulus activity can shape various properties of stimulus-related activity (e.g. level of activation and trial-to-trial variability; Podvalny et al. 2019; Northoff and Lamme 2020). A major theoretical conceptualization of this phenomenon has been proposed by TTC, according to which the ongoing (spontaneous) activity and the stimulus-evoked response need to be integrated in order for the stimulus to become conscious (Northoff and Huang 2017; Northoff and Lamme 2020). In other words, if the stimulus “arrives” at the wrong phase of the ongoing wave, the stimulus might remain unconscious. To this extent, an additional important line of investigation has been to understand the interaction between spontaneous activity and stimulus-evoked activity. Specifically, it has been suggested that this interaction might be nonadditive (He 2013; Huang et al. 2015), while Huang and colleagues (Huang et al. 2015) also suggested that interaction between spontaneous and stimulus-evoked activity might depend on the phase of spontaneous activity. In our work, we compared the properties of the spontaneous (both resting-state and prestimulus activities) with stimulus-evoked activity. However, we did not address the question of interaction between prestimulus activity and stimulus activity because our experiment was not suited for that. That is, our experiment included images of 20 different facial identities (half of them familiar and half of them unfamiliar to the participant). Different facial identities might result in different neural activities in the FFA (Davidesco et al. 2013; Ghuman et al. 2014; Axelrod and Yovel 2015; Khuvis et al. 2021). In addition, familiarity of a face can also modulate the response in the FFA (Weibert and Andrews 2015; Axelrod et al. 2019). Such variability across trials in stimulus-evoked activity due to a difference in stimuli is obviously a serious confound when one investigates the interaction between prestimulus and stimulus activity. Note that the fact that different facial stimuli might have resulted in different responses did not limit interpretation of the findings presented in the paper. This is because we did not focus on individual trials but rather on the faces condition as a whole.

Finally, an evident limitation of the present study is that it was conducted using only two face-selective multi-units. Therefore, any potential generalization to a large neural population should be made with caution. Nevertheless, the rare setup we used gave us insight that could not be obtained in previous studies. To this extent, studies with one patient (Parvizi et al. 2012; Rosenbaum et al. 2014; Aminoff et al. 2016; Jonas et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Pereira et al. 2021; Streese and Tranel 2021) or few units (Self et al. 2016) have traditionally been important in cognitive neuroscience. Thus, we believe that the present study constitutes a valuable contribution to the understanding of spontaneous activity and its relationship to stimulus-evoked activity.


Contributor Information

Rina Schwartz, The Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel; Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 5290002, Israel.

Camille Rozier, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France.

Tal Seidel Malkinson, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France.

Katia Lehongre, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France; Centre de NeuroImagerie de Recherche­CENIR, Institute of Brain and Spine, UMRS 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Pitié­Salpêtriere Hospital, 47­83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France.

Claude Adam, Neurology Department, AP−HP, GH Pitie−Salpêtrière−Charles Foix, Epilepsy Unit, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France.

Virginie Lambrecq, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France; Department of Neurophysiology, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France; Sorbonne Université, UMR S1127, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France.

Vincent Navarro, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France; Neurology Department, AP−HP, GH Pitie−Salpêtrière−Charles Foix, Epilepsy Unit, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France; Sorbonne Université, UMR S1127, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France.

Lionel Naccache, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 1127, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 7225, Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France; Department of Neurophysiology, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 boulevard de l’Hôpital, Paris 75013, France.

Vadim Axelrod, The Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel.


Conflict of interest statement

None declared.


Associated Data


Data Availability Statement

Data not publicly available. The data of the paper is clinical, patient data. Therefore, it cannot be shared.


A robust confidence–accuracy dissociation via criterion attraction

Dobromir Rahnev — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8599199, CC BY 4.0.

Many studies have shown that confidence and accuracy can be dissociated in a variety of tasks. However, most of these dissociations involve small effect sizes, occur only in a subset of participants, and include a reaction time (RT) confound. Here, I develop a new method for inducing confidence–accuracy dissociations that overcomes these limitations. The method uses an external noise manipulation and relies on the phenomenon of criterion attraction where criteria for different tasks become attracted to each other. Subjects judged the identity of stimuli generated with either low or high external noise. The results showed that the two conditions were matched on accuracy and RT but produced a large difference in confidence (effect appeared for 25 of 26 participants, effect size: Cohen’s d = 1.9). Computational modeling confirmed that these results are consistent with a mechanism of criterion attraction. These findings establish a new method for creating conditions with large differences in confidence without differences in accuracy or RT. Unlike many previous studies, however, the current method does not lead to differences in subjective experience and instead produces robust confidence–accuracy dissociations by exploiting limitations in post-perceptual, cognitive processes.


Introduction

It is well known that across a variety of tasks, subjective ratings of confidence tend to closely track one’s objective level of performance (Mamassian 2016). The close correspondence between confidence and accuracy has made studying subjective evaluation especially challenging because it has been difficult to separate it from objective performance on the main task (Morales et al. 2015a). One strategy for understanding the factors that specifically drive confidence has been to create conditions that are matched in objective performance (i.e. stimulus sensitivity) but differ in subjective performance (i.e. confidence).


Confidence–accuracy dissociations

The last decade has seen a proliferation of experiments on how subjective and objective performance can be dissociated. Most of this work has been done in the domain of perception. This research program has demonstrated that confidence–accuracy dissociations can be produced by a number of different factors including positive evidence bias (Zylberberg et al. 2012; Koizumi et al. 2015; Maniscalco et al. 2016; Samaha et al. 2016; Peters et al. 2017; Odegaard et al. 2018), stimulus variability (Zylberberg et al. 2014, de Gardelle and Mamassian 2015; Spence et al. 2016, Boldt et al. 2017, Desender et al. 2018), motor preparation and execution (Fleming et al. 2015; Gajdos et al. 2019), visual field location (Solovey et al. 2015; Li et al. 2018), transcranial magnetic stimulation (Rounis et al. 2010; Rahnev et al. 2012b, Shekhar and Rahnev 2018), varying pre-stimulus brain activity (Rahnev et al. 2012a; Samaha et al. 2017), confidence on the previous trial (Rahnev et al. 2015; Aguilar-Lleyda et al. 2021), attention (Wilimzig et al. 2008; Rahnev et al. 2011; Kurtz et al. 2017; Recht et al. 2019), arousal (Allen et al. 2016), unconsciously presented information (Vlassova et al. 2014), and stimulus visibility (Rausch et al. 2018). Many other factors that cause such dissociations are likely to be discovered in the coming years (Rahnev et al. 2021).

However, despite the existence of a very large number of confidence–accuracy dissociations, most previous manipulations are limited in three different ways. First, the dissociations are typically small in magnitude. For example, if confidence is collected on a 4-point scale for two conditions matched on accuracy, most manipulations result in a confidence difference of about 0.1 and virtually never exceed 0.2. Second, many of the dissociations appear in some but not all participants. Third, while this is rarely explicitly reported, many dissociations include a reaction time (RT) confound such that the conditions that differ in confidence are matched in accuracy but not in RT. Indeed, when RT has been reported, it has often been shorter in the condition with high confidence (Samaha et al. 2016; Boldt et al. 2019). Such RT effects can even lead to questions as to whether these dissociations truly show a divergence of subjective confidence from objective performance because, in many theories, RTs are an integral part of the signal on which confidence ratings are based (Hanks et al. 2011; Fetsch et al. 2014a,b; Zylberberg et al. 2016).

While not every manipulation suffers from all three limitations, it is currently unclear whether any method induces confidence–accuracy dissociations that are large in magnitude, consistent across participants, and free of RT confounds. Given the importance of robustly dissociating confidence and accuracy for understanding the neural and computational mechanisms of confidence (Shekhar and Rahnev 2021a), it is important to exactly develop such manipulations.


Employing criterion attraction in an external noise paradigm

Here I explore whether a robust confidence–accuracy dissociation can be induced by exploiting the principle of criterion attraction and combining it with an external noise paradigm. Criterion attraction is the idea that when people perform two interleaved tasks that optimally require different criteria, the actual criteria used for the two tasks become ‘attracted’ toward each other. The phenomenon was first demonstrated by Gorea and Sagi in a series of experiments that suggested that in some conditions the criteria may even collapse onto the same unified criterion (Gorea and Sagi 2000). Whether the criterion is truly unified across conditions has been a source of controversy (Kontsevich et al. 2002; Denison et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2021) but criterion attraction can be a robust phenomenon even if the criteria from the different conditions never completely collapse onto each other.

It has been argued that to convincingly establish the location of one’s internal criterion, it is necessary to employ an external noise paradigm (Denison et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2021). In external noise paradigms, the stimulus values of the to-be-discriminated categories are themselves sampled from a distribution (Dosher and Lu 1998; Gold et al. 2004; Lu and Dosher 2008; Qamar et al. 2013; Cabrera et al. 2015). The use of external noise in perceptual paradigms has a long history (Nagaraja 1964; Burgess et al. 1981; Legge et al. 1987) with its main advantage being that it makes it possible for the internal noise in the visual system to be benchmarked against an externally measurable quantity, which also often leads to more robust results that are consistent across observers (Lu and Dosher 2014).

In fact, Zak et al. (2012) used external noise to study criterion attraction. They demonstrated that for some participants the decision criteria across two conditions collapsed, although for other participants the criteria only became attracted to each other without becoming the same. The Zak et al.’s study thus demonstrates that criterion attraction can be studied using an external noise paradigm.

However, the Zak et al. (2012) study and previous research by Gorea and Sagi focused exclusively on criterion attraction for the decision criterion, which separates the main choice between the two stimulus categories. The principle of criterion attraction (mostly in its extreme form of complete criterion collapse) has been applied to confidence criteria in several studies to explain findings of confidence–accuracy dissociations (Rahnev et al. 2011, 2012a,b; Solovey et al. 2015; Morales et al. 2015b; Li et al. 2018), but these studies did not use external noise paradigms.


The current study

Here I specifically examine attraction for confidence criteria in an external noise paradigm to explore whether this approach can lead to a more robust confidence–accuracy dissociation. Full-contrast Gabor patches were presented with orientations sampled from two overlapping distributions. Participants judged which distribution was more likely to have generated each stimulus and provided a confidence rating. Critically, I included two different experimental conditions: in the low variability condition, the two distributions had similar means and low standard deviations (SDs), whereas in the high variability condition, the distributions had dissimilar means and high SDs. The means and SDs in the two conditions were proportionate so that the tasks were equally difficult. Furthermore, the optimal decision criterion for both conditions was identical [simply judge whether orientation is clockwise (CW) or counterclockwise (CCW) from vertical orientation]. However, in the presence of criterion attraction, the confidence criteria would move outward in the low variability condition (resulting in lower confidence) and inward in the high variability condition (resulting in higher confidence).

To anticipate, I found that both stimulus sensitivity (d’) and RT were matched across the low and high variability conditions. However, there was a robust confidence dissociation with the low variability condition resulting in lower confidence for 25 of the 26 participants compared to the high variability condition. Estimation of the criterion locations for each condition and additional computational modeling suggested that this effect is consistent with a mechanism of criterion attraction.


Methods


Participants

Twenty-eight participants took part in the experiment. Two participants were excluded because they had a negative correlation between their confidence and accuracy, indicating that they may not have given confidence ratings as instructed. Therefore, all analyses were based on the remaining 26 participants (15 females, age range = 18–22). All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and provided informed consent. The experiment was approved by the Georgia Tech Institutional Review Board.


Procedure

Participants indicated whether a grating of full contrast was drawn from one of two partially overlapping distributions. Distribution 1 tended to generate gratings with CCW orientations, whereas Distribution 2 tended to generate gratings with CW orientations. The experiment included two conditions. In the low variability condition, Distributions 1 and 2 were normal distributions, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$N\left({\mu,{\sigma ^2}} \right)$\end{document}$, with means, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\mu $\end{document}$, of –2.4° and 2.4°, respectively, and a standard deviation (SD), $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\sigma $\end{document}$, of 6°. Note that here 0° indicates vertical orientation, negative numbers indicate CCW orientations, and positive numbers indicate CW orientations. In the high variability condition, Distributions 1 and 2 were simply scaled by a factor of 3 such that they were normal distributions with means of –7.2° and 7.2°, respectively, and SD of 18°. Therefore, the overlap between the two distributions (measured as the difference between their means divided by their SD) was identical for the two conditions and resulted in a maximum sensitivity of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d{^{^{\prime}}} = {{2.4 - \left({ - 2.4} \right)} \over 6} = {{7.2 - \left({ - 7.2} \right)} \over {18}} = 0.8$\end{document}$. Participants were explicitly given all of this information. Additionally, during the initial training, they were presented with a series of 25 randomly generated grating orientations from each of these four distributions in order to aid them in building their understanding of the task.

Each trial started with a fixation period (500 ms), followed by stimulus presentation (500 ms), untimed decision period, untimed confidence period, and a feedback screen presented for 500 ms. The grating (100% contrast, 5° diameter) was presented at fixation, and on each trial its orientation was randomly generated from Distribution 1 or 2. Confidence was provided on a 4-point scale where 1 indicates low confidence and 4 indicates high confidence. Participants selected the generating distribution using the left and right arrows on a computer keyboard with their right hand and gave a confidence rating using the 1–4 keys using their left hand. Trial-by-trial feedback was provided throughout the whole experiment.

The experiment was organized in four runs each consisting of four 50-trial blocks for a total of 800 trials. Each block consisted of only low or high variability trials and the condition was clearly indicated before the beginning of the block. The low and high variability blocks alternated with the identity of the first block randomly chosen for each participant. Successive blocks were separated by 15-s breaks, while successive runs were separated by self-paced breaks. Before the beginning of the experiment, participants were given four blocks of training with a total of 100 trials.

It should be emphasized that participants were informed about all aspects of the experimental design, as well as about the optimal strategy of keeping two separate sets of criteria for the low and high variability conditions. An alternative design option would have been not to inform participants about the existence of low and high variability conditions at all. This would have likely resulted in a complete collapse of the confidence criteria for the two conditions (an extreme form of criterion attraction) but such an effect would not have reflected a limitation of human decision-making but rather a rational response strategy. The current design where participants are informed about all aspects of the experiment gives participants all information needed for optimal responses and can thus reveal the inherent limitations of human decision-making.

Participants completed the experiment on a 21.5-inch iMac monitor in a dark room. The distance between the monitor and the participants was 60 cm. The stimuli were created in MATLAB using Psychtoolbox 3 (Brainard 1997).


Analyses

For the main analyses, I computed the mean confidence and RT for each participant. Furthermore, to compare performance across participants, I computed the signal detection theory (SDT) measure $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$. To do so, I calculated the hit rate (HR) and false alarm rate (FAR) by treating Distribution 2 as the target. The value of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$ was computed separately for each condition using the formula: $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}d^{\prime}= {\varPhi ^{ - 1}}(\textit{HR}) - {\varPhi ^{ - 1}}\left({FAR} \right)\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$ where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${\varPhi ^{ - 1 }}$\end{document}$ is the inverse of the cumulative standard normal distribution that transforms HR and FAR into z-scores.

To assess the presence of criterion attraction, I computed the locations of the decision thresholds, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$, expressed in stimulus space in each condition using SDT by applying the formula: $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}{t_i} = - {1 \over 2}\left({{\varPhi ^{ - 1}}\left({H{R_i}} \right) + {\varPhi ^{ - 1}}\left({FA{R_i}} \right)} \right) \times \sigma \end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$ where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$H{R_i}$\end{document}$, and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$FA{R_i}$\end{document}$ are the criterion location, hit rate, and false alarm rate for the $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${i^{th}}$\end{document}$ criterion ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i = - 3, - 2, \ldots, 3$\end{document}$), and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\sigma $\end{document}$ is the standard deviation of the generating distributions. Note that $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_0}$\end{document}$ is the criterion that separates decisions for Distribution 1 versus Distribution 2, while the confidence criteria $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$ \pm {t_k}$\end{document}$ for $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k = \left\{ {1, 2, 3} \right\}$\end{document}$ separate the confidence ratings of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k + 1$\end{document}$ (Macmillan and Creelman 2005).
Negative criterion locations (i.e. $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i \lt 0$\end{document}$) separate successive confidence ratings for ‘Distribution 1’ decisions, while positive criterion locations (i.e. $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i \gt 0$\end{document}$) separate successive confidence ratings for ‘Distribution 2’ decisions. $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$H{R_i}$\end{document}$ was estimated such that for positive values of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$H{R_i}$\end{document}$ is the proportion of trials where Distribution 2 was used to generate the stimulus and the participant chose Distribution 2 with a confidence rating higher than $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i$\end{document}$. For negative values of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$H{R_i}$\end{document}$ is the proportion of trials where Distribution 2 was used to generate the stimulus and the participant chose either Distribution 2 regardless of confidence or Distribution 1 with confidence rating lower than or equal to $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$ - i$\end{document}$. $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$FA{R_i}$\end{document}$ was computed equivalently but for trials where Distribution 1 was used to generate the stimulus.

To assess the presence of criterion attraction, I computed the ratio $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i} = {{{t_{i, HighVar}}} \over {{t_{i,LowVar}}}}$\end{document}$ for each pair of confidence criteria in the high and low variability conditions for each confidence criterion $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i = - 3, - 2, - 1,1,2,3$\end{document}$. Since the stimulus distributions for the low and high variability conditions were identical except for scaling by a factor of 3, in the absence of internal noise, optimal confidence placement requires that the confidence criteria are also offset such that $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i} = 3$\end{document}$ for all $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i$\end{document}$. On the other hand, criterion attraction would result in the confidence criteria being offset by a factor smaller than 3. It should be noted that the optimal ratios $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i}$\end{document}$ also depend on the internal noise associated with the perception of the stimuli, which I did not measure. However, previous research suggests that the internal noise for orientation detection of Gabor patches of full contrast presented for a long period (500 ms in the current experiment) is very small and typically lower than 1° (Sally and Gurnsey 2004; Beaudot and Mullen 2006; Bang et al. 2019). This is further corroborated by the fact that the observed $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$ levels were very close to the maximum possible value of 0.8 (see Results). Importantly, internal noise of 1° would have an almost negligible effect on the optimal ratios $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i}$\end{document}$. Indeed, such internal noise would increase the SD of the high and Low variability conditions to $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\sqrt {{{18}^2} + {1^2}} = 18.03$\end{document}$ ° and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\sqrt {{6^2} + {1^2}} = 6.08$\end{document}$ ° and would therefore result in a negligible reduction of the optimal $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i}$\end{document}$ from 3 to 2.964. Therefore, realistic levels of internal noise would have a very small effect on the optimal ratios $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_i}$\end{document}$ and are thus not considered further here.

Because the stimulus orientation values were drawn randomly from the generating distributions, there were slight variations in the maximum accuracy for the two conditions across participants. To remove such variability, for each participant, I computed the number of congruent trials (where the stimulus orientation had the same polarity as the mean of the generating distribution) for each of the two conditions. If the low (high) variability condition had $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$m$\end{document}$ more congruent trials, then I excluded $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$m$\end{document}$ congruent and trials from the low (high) variability condition and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$m$\end{document}$ incongruent trials from the high (low) variability condition. The process ensured that there were equal numbers of congruent and incongruent trials in the two conditions. The excluded trials were removed from the end of the experiment for each participant. On average, this procedure resulted in excluding 20 trials per participant for a 2.5% exclusion rate.

Statistical tests included standard frequentist tests such as t-tests and correlations. In addition, where appropriate, I also performed Bayesian tests to quantify the evidence for either the null or alternative hypotheses. Conventionally, the null hypothesis is considered supported for Bayes factor values of BF01 > 3, whereas the alternative hypothesis is considered supported for BF10 > 3.


Model fitting

The main analyses above can show qualitatively the existence of criterion attraction but cannot be used to quantify its strength. Indeed, although the strength of the criterion attraction can be directly computed for each confidence criterion, there is no principled way in which these values can be combined to arrive at a single quantitative estimate per participant. For example, some participants have relatively few high-confidence responses, making the estimation of the extreme criteria (e.g. $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_{ - 3}}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_3}$\end{document}$) relatively noisy. Therefore, a simple formula, such as averaging the estimated criterion attraction values for all confidence criteria, is likely to result in an imprecise estimate of the true criterion attraction.

Therefore, to precisely quantify the degree of criterion attraction, I specified a simple process model of criterion attraction. Fitting the model to the raw data allowed me to arrive at the best quantitative estimate of the strength of criterion attraction. According to the model, participants start with a set of criteria, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$, used in the low variability condition with $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i = \left\{ { - 3, - 2, \ldots, 3} \right\}$\end{document}$. Optimally, if the criteria $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$ are used in the low variability condition, then the same criteria should be scaled by a factor of 3 and used in the high variability condition. However, in the presence of criterion attraction, the criteria in the low variability condition increase by a factor of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ and become equal to $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha \times {t_i}$\end{document}$, while the criteria in the high variability condition decrease by a factor of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ and become equal to $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${{3 \times {t_i}} \over \alpha }$\end{document}$. Note that a value of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ determines the strength of criterion attraction with $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha = 1$\end{document}$ corresponding to no criterion attraction and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha = \sqrt 3 = 1.73$\end{document}$, corresponding to a situation where the two sets of criteria collapse onto a single set of identical values.

The model was fit to the data from each participant using the Bayesian Adaptive Direct Search toolbox, version 1.0.5 (Acerbi and Ma 2017). The model had seven free parameters: $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$ for $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i = \left\{ { - 3, - 2, - 1, 1, 2, 3} \right\}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$. For simplicity, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_0}$\end{document}$ was set to 0. The fitting was performed on the actual stimulus orientations encountered by each individual participant. To find the best fit, I computed the log-likelihood value associated with the full distribution of probabilities of each response type, as done previously (Yeon and Rahnev 2020; Shekhar and Rahnev 2021b): $$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}Log\ likelihood = \mathop \sum \limits_{i,j,k} {\rm{log}}({p_{ijk}})*{n_{ijk}}\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$ where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${p_{ijk}}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${n_{ijk}}$\end{document}$ are the response probability and the number of trials, respectively, associated with the Distribution $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$i \in \left\{ {1,2} \right\}$\end{document}$, confidence rating $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$j \in \left\{ {1,2,3,4} \right\}$\end{document}$, and condition $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k$\end{document}$, where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k = 1$\end{document}$ corresponds to the low variability condition and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$k = 2$\end{document}$ corresponds to the high variability condition. The best fit was determined as the set of parameters that maximized the log-likelihood value. Finally, I examined the resulting $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ values for each participant as the estimate of the strength of criterion attraction and performed t-tests to compare the resulting values to 1.


Data, materials, and code

All data and codes for the analyses have been made freely available at https://osf.io/g32tv/. The repository also includes the codes used to collect the data and can be reused by anyone who may want to employ this method of generating confidence–accuracy dissociations. In addition, the data have been uploaded to the Confidence Database (Rahnev et al. 2020).


Results

I investigated whether a robust confidence–accuracy dissociation could be achieved by exploiting the principle of criterion attraction in an external noise paradigm. Participants judged which of the two distributions generated a given stimulus and provided a confidence rating on a 4-point scale. Critically, two conditions—low variability and high variability (that were simply scaled versions of each other)—were presented in blocks of 50 trials. If the confidence criteria for the two conditions become attracted to each other, this would produce a confidence–accuracy dissociation.


Low and high variability conditions exhibit robust confidence–accuracy dissociation

I first compared the sensitivity (as computed by the SDT measure $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$) and RT between the two conditions. I found that participants performed equally well in the low variability ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}= 0.78$\end{document}$) and high variability ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}= 0.79$\end{document}$) conditions [t(25) = 0.56, P = 0.58, Cohen’s d = 0.11, BF01 = 4.17]. Furthermore, the performance in each condition was indistinguishable from the maximum possible value of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}= 0.8$\end{document}$ [low variability condition: t(25) = –0.83, P = 0.4, Cohen’s d = –0.16, BF01 = 3.53; high variability condition: t(25) = –0.38, P = 0.7, Cohen’s d = –0.08, BF01 = 4.51], suggesting that the internal noise associated with the perception of the Gabor patches must have been minimal. Similar to $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$, RT was also equated between the low variability (mean RT = 859 ms) and high variability (mean RT = 852 ms) conditions [t(25) = –0.52, P = 0.61, Cohen’s d = –0.10, BF01 = 4.26]. These results show that the two conditions were very well matched in difficulty as measured both by stimulus sensitivity and RT.

Despite the close match in performance, there was a large difference in confidence between the two conditions. Specifically, the low variability condition resulted in much lower average confidence (2.43) than the high variability condition (2.81) with the difference exhibiting a very large effect size [t(25) = 9.7, P = 5.8 × 10–10, Cohen’s d = 1.9; BF10 = 1.9 × 107]. Furthermore, the higher confidence in the high variability condition was present in 25 of the 26 participants (96%), demonstrating that the difference in confidence was extremely consistent across participants.

To further establish that the difference in confidence is independent of any effects on performance, I examined whether participants who tended to have larger confidence effects also exhibited a corresponding difference in $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$ or RT. I found that this was not the case. Specifically, participants who exhibited large confidence effects (i.e. large difference between the confidence in the high and low variability conditions, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$con{f_{HighVar}} - con{f_{LowVar}}$\end{document}$) were not more likely to have a large difference in $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$ (correlation between $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$con{f_{HighVar}} - con{f_{LowVar}}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d_{HighVar}^{^{\prime}} - d_{LowVar}^{^{\prime}}$\end{document}$: r = –0.11, P = 0.59; BF01 = 5.73) or in RT (correlation between $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$con{f_{HighVar}} - con{f_{LowVar}}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$R{T_{HighVar}} - R{T_{LowVar}}$\end{document}$: r = –0.18, P = 0.37; BF01 = 4.43). Therefore, the difference in confidence between the low and high variability conditions was not driven by the objective performance of the participants.


Time course of the effects

It is important to emphasize that the confidence–accuracy dissociation results above were obtained despite the fact that the low and high variability conditions were presented in separate blocks of 50 trials. Given this blocked design, one may expect that the criterion attraction would be larger at the beginning of each block when the influence of the previous block is likely to be the strongest. Indeed, I found that confidence increased from the first to the second half of the blocks for the low variability condition [first half = 2.40, second half = 2.46; t(25) = –2.80, P = 0.01, Cohen’s d = –0.55, BF10 = 4.80; left] but decreased for the high variability condition [first half = 2.84, second half = 2.77; t(25) = 3.02, P = 0.006, Cohen’s d = 0.59, BF10 = 7.60]. Thus, the difference in confidence between the two conditions was significantly smaller in the second half of the blocks [first half difference = 0.45, second half difference = 0.31; t(25) = 4.07, P = 0.0004, Cohen’s d = 0.80, BF10 = 75.25]. These results demonstrate that the results were largest shortly after a switch from the previous block and suggest that these effects should be even larger in interleaved designs.

Analyzing each block in even finer intervals of 10 trials each revealed that this effect was driven mostly by a very large effect at the beginning of each block but without any evidence that the effect disappears by the end of the block (right). Indeed, the difference in confidence between the two conditions was 0.54, 0.43, 0.24, 0.30, and 0.38, respectively, for the five sets of 10 trials constituting one 50-trial block. The smallest difference in confidence thus occurs toward the middle rather than at the end of the block. These results show that the criterion attraction effect is particularly strong at the very beginning of a block, but remains relatively stable afterward and does not disappear by the end of the block. The effects of criterion attraction thus appear relatively long-lasting and must extend for well over 50 trials.


Confidence criterion locations

The results so far demonstrate that the low and high variability conditions give rise to a robust confidence–accuracy dissociation. To further examine the nature of this dissociation, I computed the location, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_i}$\end{document}$, of each decision criterion for both the low and high variability conditions in orientation space (see Methods).

As could be expected, the Criterion $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_0}$\end{document}$ used to distinguish between Distributions 1 and 2 was very close to 0° (vertical) in both the low variability [$\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_0} = 0.089$\end{document}$ °, t(25) = 0.67, P = 0.51, Cohen’s d = 0.13, BF01 = 3.93] and the high variability conditions [$\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_0} = 0.083$\end{document}$ °, t(25) = 0.40, P = 0.69, Cohen’s d = 0.08, BF01 = 4.49], with no difference between the two conditions [t(25) = –0.04, P = 0.97, Cohen’s d = –0.01, BF01 = 4.82]. These results suggest that, as expected, participants made the primary decision by using a largely unbiased criterion centered on vertical orientation.

Critically, I examined the locations of the confidence criteria. In the absence of criterion attraction, the criterion locations in the high variability condition should be three times higher than in the low variability condition (note that this ratio could be expected to be slightly smaller due to internal noise; see Methods). However, I found the ratio, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$r$\end{document}$, of their locations to be around 2 for all criteria ($\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_{ - 3}}}} = 2.03$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_{ - 2}}}} = 1.95$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_{ - 1}}}} = 2.24$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_1}}} = 2.19$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_2}}} = 2.05$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${r_{{t_3}}} = 2.07$\end{document}$). Since the ratios $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$r$\end{document}$ are not normally distributed, I performed nonparametric signed rank tests that confirmed that all of these ratios were significantly lower than 3 (all P values < 0.0035). To avoid the issue of having to use non-parametric tests, I also compared the criteria in the high variability condition with the criteria in the low variability condition multiplied by a factor of 3. I found that the scaled criteria in the low variability condition were always more extreme (either more negative or more positive) than the criteria in the high variability condition [$\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_{ - 3}}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 7.31, P = 1.2 × 10–7, Cohen’s d = 1.43, BF10 = 1.2*105; $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_{ - 2}}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 6.08, P = 2.4 × 10–6, Cohen’s d = 1.19, BF10 = 7.8 × 103; $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_{ - 1}}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 4.06, P = 0.0004, Cohen’s d = 0.80, BF10 = 70.6; $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_1}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 4.41, P = 0.0002, Cohen’s d = 0.87, BF10 = 166.7; $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_2}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 6.74, P = 4.6 × 10–7, Cohen’s d = 1.32, BF10 = 3.6 × 104; $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${t_3}$\end{document}$: t(25) = 6.86, P = 3.5 × 10–7, Cohen’s d = 1.34, BF10 = 4.6 × 104], thus confirming the existence of substantial criterion attraction.


Computational modeling

Finally, I developed a simple computational model to more precisely quantify the strength of criterion attraction. The model assumed that the criteria in the low and high variability conditions are multiplicatively attracted to each other by a constant factor $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$. Fitting the model to the data revealed that the criteria moved by an average factor of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha = 1.244$\end{document}$ (range = 1.025–1.473, SD = 0.126), which was significantly larger than the factor of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha = 1$\end{document}$ corresponding to a lack of criterion attraction [t(25) = 9.86, P = 4.2 × 10–10, Cohen’s d = 1.93, BF10 = 2.5 × 107]. Note that if two criteria are originally separated by a factor of 3 (e.g. 10° and 30°), then after each of them is attracted to the other by a factor of 1.244 and they become separated by a factor of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${3 \over {{{1.244}^2}}} = 1.94$\end{document}$ (e.g. 12.4° and 24.1°). Importantly, the parameter $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ was estimated to be higher than 1 for all participants, suggesting that all 26 participants may have exhibited some level of criterion attraction.

As may be expected, the estimated strength of criterion attraction was strongly correlated with the confidence effect (across-subject correlation between $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$con{f_{HighVar}} - con{f_{LowVar}}$\end{document}$: r = 0.75, P = 8.6 × 10–6). Nevertheless, even though the criterion attraction was found for all participants and had a relatively large magnitude, the attraction fell far short of causing the same set of criteria to be used for both the low and high variability conditions. Indeed, a unique set of criteria across the two conditions would correspond to an $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha $\end{document}$ level of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\sqrt 3 = 1.732$\end{document}$ or a 73.2% change in the locations of the criteria. The observed average $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$\alpha = 1.244$\end{document}$ corresponds to a 24.4% change or exactly one-third of the strength of criterion attraction that would result in a unique set of criteria for the two conditions.


Discussion

Many studies in the last decade have demonstrated the existence of confidence–accuracy dissociations (Wilimzig et al. 2008; Zylberberg et al. 2012, Vlassova et al. 2014; de Gardelle and Mamassian 2015; Koizumi et al. 2015; Rahnev et al. 2015; Song et al. 2015; Samaha et al. 2016; Spence et al. 2016, Boldt et al. 2017; Desender et al. 2018). Such findings have been foundational in discovering the mechanisms of confidence computations and have informed debates regarding the optimality of confidence ratings (Aitchison et al. 2015; Navajas et al. 2017; Rahnev and Denison 2018). However, most previous confidence–accuracy dissociations were of relatively small magnitude, were relatively inconsistent across participants, and included an RT confound. Here I developed a new experimental design based on external noise and the principle of criterion attraction. The design produced a confidence–accuracy dissociation of large magnitude and effect size, which was consistent across participants and free of RT confounds. These results establish a new method of inducing robust confidence–accuracy dissociations and have important implications about the ongoing debate regarding the malleability of subjective criteria.


Mechanisms of criterion attraction

Criterion attraction is usually interpreted as a limitation of criterion setting where humans are unable to maintain two completely separate sets of criteria (Gorea and Sagi 2005). The idea is that the two sets of criteria pull on each other, thus leading to criterion attraction. In theory, criterion attraction could occur either at a perceptual or a post-perceptual (i.e. cognitive) level. In the current study, criterion attraction occurs at a post-perceptual level. Indeed, the perceptual stimuli here were very clear (presented at full contrast for a relatively long time) and therefore perception itself was unlikely to be substantially affected by the two conditions of the experiment (low vs. high variability conditions). Therefore, the observed confidence–accuracy dissociation in the present study is due not to differences in subjective experience but to cognitive limitations in converting the subjective experience into an appropriate confidence rating. As such, the present effect cannot be used in studies that seek to produce differences in subjective experience in the absence of performance confounds (Morales et al. 2015a). What the current paradigm produces instead is differences in reported confidence in the absence of performance confounds, with the confidence difference stemming from post-perceptual factors. This effect may still be useful for understanding subjective experience by providing a control case where a robust difference in reported confidence is not based on a change in subjective experience.

It is also important to clarify that criterion attraction is a separate phenomenon from other established effects such as regression to the mean. Regression to the mean occurs when in a random sequence of events an extreme observation is followed, with high probability, by a less extreme one. As such, regression to the mean is a purely statistical effect with no human participant necessary. On the other hand, criterion attraction is not a statistical necessity and instead reflects limitations of human criterion setting (e.g. it would be easy to design an artificial agent with no criterion attraction).


Relationship to confidence–accuracy dissociation in previous research

As already reviewed in the Introduction, confidence–accuracy dissociations have been observed in many different studies using a variety of manipulations such as stimulus variability, attention, visual field location, and positive evidence bias. It is thus important to consider whether the current effects relate to any of these previous manipulations. For example, studies on stimulus variability (Zylberberg et al. 2014, de Gardelle and Mamassian 2015; Spence et al. 2016; Boldt et al. 2017) or positive evidence bias (Zylberberg et al. 2012; Koizumi et al. 2015) used stimulus manipulations in ways that may seem similar to the external noise manipulation here. However, it is important to clarify that none of these previous studies had a true external noise manipulation—in each case, there was a one-to-one mapping between the generating stimulus category and each stimulus. However, no such one-to-one mapping exists for external noise paradigms like in the present study; instead, a given stimulus feature (e.g. orientation) could be generated from either stimulus category. As such, the external noise manipulation used here is qualitatively different from the manipulations in most previous research on confidence–accuracy dissociations.

The presence of robust confidence differences in the absence of corresponding differences in either accuracy or RT may appear at odds with proposals that confidence is determined by the accuracy and RT of decision (Kiani et al. 2014; Zylberberg et al. 2016). However, these results only falsify an extreme version of this proposal where confidence is determined exclusively by accuracy and RT. Indeed, the current results show that confidence is influenced by factors separate from accuracy and RT, but cannot be used to argue that accuracy or RT are not causally important for confidence ratings in other designs. Similarly, criterion attraction can be modeled using any framework (e.g. signal detection and accumulation to bound) and thus cannot be used to distinguish between different frameworks of perceptual decision-making.


Criterion attraction in previous research

Many studies by Gorea and Sagi suggested the presence of criterion attraction for various interleaved conditions (Gorea and Sagi 2000, Gorea et al. 2005; Zak et al. 2012). In some of these studies, the criteria even appeared to collapse onto the same unified criterion. Consequently, several more recent studies have simply assumed the presence of a unique criterion for different interleaved conditions without directly testing this assumption (Rahnev et al. 2011, 2012a,b; Solovey et al. 2015; Morales et al. 2015b; Li et al. 2018). These studies invariably used internal noise designs where criterion locations cannot be expressed in stimulus parameters and thus the presence of a unique criterion is perhaps impossible to test directly. However, this practice has recently been strongly criticized (Lee et al. 2021), especially in the light of a recent study using external noise where the criteria across different conditions were found not to be identical (Denison et al. 2018).

The notion of the confidence criteria attracting each other but without becoming identical may provide a unifying account for all studies to date. Findings that have been explained by a fully unified criterion across conditions could generally be explained just as well by criterion attraction (Morales et al. 2015b). On the other hand, the study by Denison et al. (2018) could also have featured criterion attraction that was simply too difficult to detect due to the study’s unique experimental design. Indeed, in that study, the optimal decision strategy in some conditions was not to give high confidence ratings at all, thus eliminating certain confidence criteria and making it difficult to test for criterion attraction. The possibility of an undetected criterion attraction in Denison et al.’s study is also supported by the fact that their data were best explained not by an optimal Bayesian model but by a heuristic one, which is consistent with the existence of decision biases.

These considerations suggest that the debate surrounding criterion interactions across conditions should perhaps move away from arguments of whether the criteria in different conditions are fully independent or fully unified. There already appears to be a substantial amount of evidence that the truth is somewhere in between. Therefore, future efforts would be better directed toward identifying the strength of criterion interactions and the factors that modulate this strength. By precisely quantifying the degree of criterion attraction in an external noise paradigm, the current paper makes a small step in this direction.


Criterion attraction in the real world

All studies discussed here featured participants performing tasks on artificial stimuli in laboratory conditions. Therefore, an important question concerns whether similar criterion attraction exists in real-world settings. I think that it does. Indeed, virtually all perception occurs in conditions that vary from context to context and is therefore likely subject to criterion attraction. For example, when attempting to detect a mosquito, one should optimally adopt conservative criteria for plain backgrounds and liberal criteria for patterned backgrounds. While the relevant study has not been performed, I suspect that such situations are accompanied by strong criterion attraction where people have a much stronger bias to detect a mosquito against a plain background compared to a patterned one.

In addition, criterion attraction is likely to be relevant beyond perceptual tasks. Consider a teacher grading essays by fifth and eighth graders mixed in a single pile (but still clearly identified). Will the teacher be able to use age-appropriate grading criteria or will she exhibit criterion attraction and give relatively lower scores to the fifth graders and relatively higher scores to the eighth graders? Although I can only speculate, it seems likely that criterion attraction would occur in any situation where a person evaluates two or more groups of different abilities in mixed order, potentially with important societal consequences.


Limitations

One limitation of the current study is that its design only points to the existence of criterion attraction but does not make it possible to measure the movement of the criteria in each condition independently. It is thus possible that, at least for some participants, the criteria from one condition remained constant and only the criteria in the other condition were attracted to the criteria in the first. I note that such an effect would still be a form of ‘criterion attraction’ and therefore would not change any of the conclusions of the current study. This question could be resolved by future studies that present each condition in isolation (ideally on separate days) before presenting them together in the same experimental session. Nevertheless, the split-half analyses already provide some evidence that both sets of criteria experienced attraction. Indeed, given that confidence increased from the first to the second half of blocks for the low variability condition but decreased from the first to the second half of blocks for the high variability condition, it appears that both sets of conditions experienced stronger criterion attraction in the first (compared to the second) half of blocks. Another limitation is that, as noted in the Methods, the current study did not measure the level of internal noise. Finally, the current study also leaves open the question of whether criterion attraction would have been even stronger in the absence of trial-by-trial feedback, or if the two conditions were interleaved in all blocks.


Conclusion

I report on the strongest, to my knowledge, confidence–accuracy dissociation to date: even though both $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$d^{\prime}$\end{document}$ and RT were well matched across the two conditions (both BF01 > 3), confidence was robustly different. The effect was consistent across subjects and very strong in both magnitude (0.38-point difference on a scale where the extremes, 1 and 4, are 3 points apart) and effect size (Cohen’s d = 1.9). Therefore, the current study provides a robust method for inducing large confidence–accuracy dissociations.


What it is like to be a bit: an integrated information decomposition account of emergent mental phenomena

Andrea I Luppi, Pedro A M Mediano, Fernando E Rosas, David J Harrison, Robin L Carhart-Harris, Daniel Bor, Emmanuel A Stamatakis — Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021. PMC8600547, CC BY 4.0.

A central question in neuroscience concerns the relationship between consciousness and its physical substrate. Here, we argue that a richer characterization of consciousness can be obtained by viewing it as constituted of distinct information-theoretic elements. In other words, we propose a shift from quantification of consciousness—viewed as integrated information—to its decomposition. Through this approach, termed Integrated Information Decomposition (ΦID), we lay out a formal argument that whether the consciousness of a given system is an emergent phenomenon depends on its information-theoretic composition—providing a principled answer to the long-standing dispute on the relationship between consciousness and emergence. Furthermore, we show that two organisms may attain the same amount of integrated information, yet differ in their information-theoretic composition. Building on ΦID’s revised understanding of integrated information, termed ΦR, we also introduce the notion of ΦR-ing ratio to quantify how efficiently an entity uses information for conscious processing. A combination of ΦR and ΦR-ing ratio may provide an important way to compare the neural basis of different aspects of consciousness. Decomposition of consciousness enables us to identify qualitatively different ‘modes of consciousness’, establishing a common space for mapping the phenomenology of different conscious states. We outline both theoretical and empirical avenues to carry out such mapping between phenomenology and information-theoretic modes, starting from a central feature of everyday consciousness: selfhood. Overall, ΦID yields rich new ways to explore the relationship between information, consciousness, and its emergence from neural dynamics.


Introduction

A central aim in both neuroscience and philosophy of mind is understanding the relationship between consciousness and its physical substrate. The past two decades have seen a proliferation of theoretical, experimental, and philosophical work on this topic (Crick and Koch 2003; Friston 2012; Tononi and Koch 2015; Koch et.al. 2016; Tononi et al. 2016; Parr and Friston 2019; Kleiner 2020). Additionally, an important and related question to how consciousness arises from matter concerns a mathematically precise and conceptually clear account of what constitutes ‘emergence’ (Tononi et al. 1998; Friston et al. 2014; Hoel et al. 2016; De Caro and Grasso 2017; Palacios et al. 2017, Hesp et al. 2019; Cea 2020). The present work is situated at the convergence of these two fundamental research avenues: i.e. in this paper we seek to contribute to the formalization of the relationship between consciousness and its underlying physical substrate and elucidate to what extent this relationship can be rigorously understood in terms of emergence. To this end, we demonstrate the value of leveraging novel information-theoretic approaches to shed light on the nature of consciousness.

Here, we understand consciousness to be that which is lost during dreamless sleep and deep anaesthesia and recovered upon awakening (Schwitzgebel 2016). Following William James’s celebrated notion of the stream of consciousness, we take the stance that subjective experiences dynamically unfold over time. For this reason, when seeking to understand the aspects of the physical world that correspond to subjective experiences, and give rise to them, we direct our attention to neural dynamics. Indeed, neural dynamics have recently been proposed as a ‘common currency’ between brain and mind (Northoff et al. 2020), and a growing body of empirical work has demonstrated—through a variety of neuroimaging modalities and analytic approaches—that considering neural dynamics can provide powerful insights into consciousness and its alterations (Barttfeld et al. 2015; Atasoy et al. 2017, Uhrig et al. 2018; Deco et al. 2019; Demertzi et al. 2019; Lee. et al. 2019; Lord et al. 2019; Luppi et al. 2019, 2020b, 2020c, 2021b; Vlisides et al. 2019; Dinesh et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020; Standage et al. 2020; Varley et al. 2020a, 2020b; Cavanna et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2020; Eagleman et al. 2019; Hahn et al. 2021; Hutchinson et al. 2014).

Thus, both theoretical and empirical reasons lead us to adopt a process-theoretic framework to the study of consciousness. Shannon’s information theory is particularly well-suited to address process-theoretic approaches such as the one adopted here, because it enables the study of dynamical processes in a way that is not committed to any specific physical instantiation. This is not to say that the physicality of the system does not matter for the instantiation of consciousness: some material substrates may be more or less suitable (e.g. in terms of degrees of freedom) to sustain the dynamics on which consciousness depends (see esp. Barrett 2014). Rather, information theory enables us to focus on the dynamics and their properties, abstracted from considerations about physical instantiation or neuroimaging modality.


From quantification of consciousness to its decomposition

The close relationship between consciousness and information is a key aspect of the well-known Integrated Information Theory of consciousness (hereafter, IIT) (Tononi et al. 1994; Balduzzi and Tononi 2008; Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi et al. 2016; Tononi 2008 Manifesto). A core intuition from IIT is that the ‘integration of information’ represents a fundamental aspect of consciousness—and therefore, quantifying integrated information (suitably defined, as we explore in ‘Technical preliminaries’) enables an effective quantification of consciousness.

Quantification is a key step in the scientific process, and the notion that consciousness could be quantified has contributed in no small part to the scientific study of consciousness in the last two decades. After quantification, decomposition into fundamental elements can be a fruitful next step in the scientific process, driving major advances in fields such as physics and chemistry over the last two centuries. As an illustrative example, knowing whether the clear liquid in one’s glass is composed by twice as many hydrogen atoms as oxygen atoms, or oxygen and hydrogen in equal parts, represents the difference between drinking refreshing water or poisonous hydrogen peroxide. We believe that understanding the information-theoretic composition of consciousness will be similarly crucial for its scientific characterization.

Within this context, the aim of this paper is to shed light on consciousness from an information-theoretic perspective by capitalizing on major advances in information theory, specifically within the recent framework of Partial Information Decomposition (PID) (Bertschinger et al. 2014; Griffith and Koch 2014; Wibral et al. 2017; Lizier et al. 2018) and its multivariate extension, Integrated Information Decomposition (ΦID) (Mediano et al. 2021). Shannon’s seminal results on information theory are mainly focused on information transmission between a single source and a single target; PID extends classic information-theoretic approaches to systems involving multiple sources of information (Wibral et al. 2017). Moreover, the more recent development of ΦID further extends PID to scenarios involving multiple targets as well as multiple sources (Mediano et al. 2021). Such an extension is necessary if we are to investigate complex, multivariate systems with intricate causal relationships, of which the human brain is a prime example (Turkheimer et al. 2021; Varley et al. 2020b). Thus, information decomposition—and ΦID in particular—proves especially valuable for our purposes, being ideally suited to accommodate the multifaceted dynamics that characterize neural activity.

Here we propose a shift in perspective beyond the information-theoretic quantification of consciousness and towards its decomposition into fundamental information-theoretic elements. For this purpose, we explore the consequences of viewing the core intuition that consciousness can be quantified in terms of integrated information in the light of ΦID. Note that we are not thereby committed to any of IIT’s additional theoretical positions: for instance, we remain agnostic on whether integrated information is identical with consciousness or merely co-extensive with it under certain descriptions. Likewise, our approach does not deal with ‘composition’ in the IIT sense of which qualia contribute to a specific experience (see section: From bits to bats): rather, our focus is entirely on the notion of consciousness as quantifiable in terms of information and what the decomposition of this information can tell us about consciousness.

Overall, this paper has two key goals. First, to demonstrate that understanding the information-theoretic composition of consciousness may be crucial to obtain insights about what consciousness is—and the various modes in which it can be configured. Our second major goal is the formal demonstration, within the ΦID framework, that consciousness can comprise both emergent and non-emergent phenomena—which we demonstrate based on its information-theoretic composition.

We call this ΦID-based approach to consciousness ‘Psy-ID’ (ΨID), as it is the result of an application of ΦID to psychological phenomena. Thus, ΨID is a theoretical framework that seeks to understand consciousness and other mental phenomena using insights from the broadly applicable mathematics of information decomposition—and ΦID in particular. Importantly, this framework also sheds new light on other prominent theories of consciousness such as the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (Dehaene and Changeuz 2011; Mashour et al. 2020) by providing an information-theoretic definition of the workspace in terms of synergistic interactions (Luppi et al. 2020b). In contrast to other theoretical accounts of consciousness, ΨID provides a formal framework that is applicable to neuroimaging data, which enables a range of practical investigations on such observed dynamics (Mediano et al. 2021; Luppi et al. 2020a). This is especially important because we take it as imperative to our theoretical endeavours to provide predictions about consciousness that can be tested—and possibly falsified—by our current neuroimaging methods.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First, ‘Technical preliminaries’ provides an accessible overview of the main information-theoretic intuitions and basic premises on which our work builds. Then, ‘Theoretical contributions’ introduces ΨID to explicate the ramifications of ΦID for understanding consciousness and the neural dynamics on which it depends. Therein, we specify core terminology that is relevant to the hypotheses and predictions we propose in the third section, ‘Empirical predictions’. In this final section, we explore testable hypotheses and predictions as applied to recent experimental work on psychedelics and consciousness. This paper concludes with a series of remarks on the implications of ΨID and its potential limitations.


Technical preliminaries

This section develops the formal intuitions and basic premises behind IIT, from which our paper takes its start. We then follow with an elaboration of the PID framework and its extension to IIT, called ΦID.


The mind’s Φ: integrated information theory

The starting point of our investigation is the notion that consciousness can be quantified in terms of the integrated information of a system—the fundamental intuition behind the early development of IIT (Tononi 2004; Balduzzi and Tononi 2008). Stemming from the seminal ideas put forward by Tononi et al. (1994), IIT’s core premise (which we share) is that the brain can be comprehensively characterized by its dynamics—i.e. the way in which the brain’s activity unfolds over time (Tononi and Edelman 1998; Northoff et al. 2020). Correspondingly, these dynamics allow the brain’s current state to contain some information about its past and future states. Mathematically, this information that ‘flows’ from the past to the future of a dynamical system can be captured by the so-called time-delayed mutual information (TDMI) (Barrett and Seth 2011), denoted as $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$I\left({{X_t}; {X_{t + 1}}} \right)$\end{document}$, where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${X_t}$\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${X_{t + 1}}$\end{document}$ indicate the state of the system at consecutive times t and t+1. Broadly speaking, TDMI provides a first step towards quantifying the dynamical structure of a complex system (James et al. 2011).

A further refinement on TDMI is to consider not only the overall amount of information, but also its spatiotemporal distribution. Different parts of the brain exchange information constantly—and the existence and relevance of these precise informational patterns is uncontroversial in cognitive neuroscience. Moreover, although a precise, theoretically-based measure remains to be discovered, there is mounting evidence that the patterns of information that spread across the brain are related to consciousness (Casali et al. 2013; Luppi et al. 2020b).

One of the key insights of Tononi, Sporns, and Edelman was to realize that this information must be shared across the brain in particular ways, such that it is simultaneously integrated (so the brain can behave as a whole) and differentiated (so its parts can perform independent processing). These ideas materialized into specific formulae to quantify integration and differentiation in the brain. In particular, the first such quantity to explicitly include the brain’s dynamics into its formulation was the measure of integrated information initially proposed by Balduzzi and Tononi (2008) and subsequently revised to be applicable to experimental time-series data by Barrett and Seth (2011). For a given bipartition of $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${X_t}$\end{document}$ into two parts $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_t^1, M_t^2$\end{document}$, the measure is given by

$$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}{{{\Phi}}^{WMS}} = I\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right) - \mathop \sum \limits_{i = 1}^2 I\left({M_t^i;\ M_{t + 1}^i} \right){\ }\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$.

As above, here $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${X_t}$\end{document}$ denotes the state of the system as a whole at time t $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_t^i$\end{document}$ denotes the ith part of X at time t (and likewise for $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${M_{t + 1}} $\end{document}$ and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_{t + 1}^i$\end{document}$). Thus, this measure compares the information flow between the past and the future (as captured by TDMI) observed in the whole system X with the flow observed within each of its parts—for this reason it is also referred to as ‘whole-minus-sum’ Φ (Mediano et al. 2021). This measure is easy to compute (compared with other Φ measures) (Oizumi et al. 2016) and represents a noteworthy attempt to capture the powerful intuitions behind IIT. However, once the original formulation from Balduzzi and Tononi is rendered suitable for practical empirical application (Barrett and Seth 2011;Barrett and Mediano 2019), the resulting mathematical formulation has known shortcomings, including the fact that it can yield negative values in some cases—which are hard to interpret, as a system cannot intuitively be ‘negatively integrated’ or have negative consciousness (Oizumi et al. 2016; Mediano et al. 2018). In the following, we show how these shortcomings can be overcome by means of the mathematical framework of ΦID.

Note that the formula for ΦWMS above stems from what is known as IIT 2.0, but TDMI is by no means the only way of quantifying the dynamical structure of a system: indeed, subsequent developments in IIT 3.0 used alternative metrics with a more explicit focus on causal interpretations (Oizumi et al. 2014), which were in turn replaced in the latest iteration known as IIT 4.0 (Barbosa et al. 2020). Our rationale for following the quantification of integrated information from IIT 2.0 rather than these later versions is that IIT 2.0 is the last version of IIT to be within the scope of Shannon’s information theory. Since the goal of the present work is to investigate the potential of information decomposition to shed light on integrated information and consciousness (see section: Theoretical contributions), the more recent versions of IIT are not suitable for our purposes—thereby requiring us to work with the IIT 2.0 formulation of Φ.


Information decomposition

The TDMI, on which ΦWMS depends, is a special case of Shannon’s mutual information, I. On a conceptual level, this ‘information’ can be understood in several distinct but converging ways (Shannon 1948; Hellman and Raviv 1970; Feder and Merhav 1994; Jaynes 2003; Parrondo et al. 2015). While extremely versatile, Shannon’s information theory is (mainly) confined to interactions between pairs of variables (e.g. a sender and a receiver), and it is not equipped to study the information that multiple parts of a system have about each other’s dynamical evolution.

Part of the necessary technical equipment for such analysis was introduced by Williams and Beer (2010) with their framework of PID. PID, in short, decomposes the total information that two sources give about a target into four distinct ‘partial information atoms’, typically called ‘synergistic’, ‘redundant’, and ‘unique’ information [note that for the sake of simplicity, throughout this work we will only consider the case of bivariate systems: for details of generalization to more than two variables, we refer the reader to Mediano et al. (2021)].

As an illustrative example of redundant, unique, and synergistic information, consider humans’ two sources of visual information about the world: the eyes. The two eyes provide in part the same information, which is the information that is not lost when closing one or the other eye. This information is therefore carried redundantly by both sources. However, information about the very edge of the visual field is unique to each eye: this unique information is lost when the corresponding eye is closed. Finally, closing either eye will also remove stereoscopic information about depth: this information is not carried by either eye alone, but rather it requires both eyes together, arising synergistically from their interaction.

Thus, it is important to note that atoms are ways in which the information is being carried and should not be confused with the sources of information that are doing the carrying, nor with the specific content that is being carried: any reference to e.g. ‘synergy’ or ‘redundancy’ should be understood as shorthand for ‘information carried synergistically’ and ‘information carried redundantly’, and likewise for other atoms. Therefore, as a way of example, if both my eyes show me that there is a red apple in front of me, then each eye (source) is carrying redundantly (atom) information about an apple (target), with the information in question being that the apple is red (content).

By allowing us to distinguish qualitatively different phenomena involving multiple information sources that cannot be disentangled by classic information theory (Rosas et al. 2016), PID moves beyond Shannon’s information theory (James and Crutchfield 2017). These novel capabilities of PID have found fruitful application in multiple areas of neuroscience, from spike trains to whole-brain dynamics (Stramaglia et al. 2014; Wibral et al. 2017).


Decomposing information flow

Thanks to the new lens provided by PID, it is now possible to decompose the information that the past state of each part of the system, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_t^1$\end{document}$, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_t^2$\end{document}$, carries about the future of the whole system, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}${X_{t + 1}}$\end{document}$. Formally, for a system with two parts, PID states that the information that part i has about the future of the system can be decomposed as

$$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{equation*}I\left({M_t^i;{X_{t + 1}}} \right) = Red\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right) + U{n_i}\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right)\vspace*{3pt}\end{equation*}$$\end{document} $$ where $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$Red\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right)$\end{document}$ is the so-called ‘redundant information’ provided by the sources (here, the parts of the system) and $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$U{n_i}\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right)$\end{document}$ is the information that $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$M_t^i$\end{document}$ provides uniquely. Similarly, the joint mutual information (i.e. information that the past state of the system as a whole carries about its future) is decomposed as

$$ \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$$\begin{align*} & I\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right) = Red\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right) + U{n_1}\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right) + U{n_2}\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right)\\ & \qquad \qquad \qquad + Syn\left({{X_t};\ {X_{t + 1}}} \right)\vspace*{5pt}\end{align*}$$\end{document} $$

Here we see that in addition to redundancy and unique atoms, this expression includes $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$Syn\left({{X_t}; {X_{t + 1}}} \right)$\end{document}$, which accounts for the so-called ‘synergistic’ information: information provided by both sources jointly, but not separately.

Thus, PID provides the means to understand how each part of the system carries information about the future state of the system as a whole, decomposing this information flow into redundant, unique and synergistic contributions. However, a key drawback of PID is that, while it is naturally applicable to multiple source variables, it can only be applied to scenarios with a single target. Thus, within the PID framework the future state of the system is still considered as a monolithic entity, without being able to consider the future state of each part individually. To resolve this shortcoming and extend the range of applicability of PID, Mediano et al. (2021) put forward the framework of ΦID, which forms the mathematical basis of our proposal. Formally, ΦID is a multi-target extension of PID that can identify the redundant, unique, and synergistic components of the information that multiple source variables carry about multiple target variables.

Specifically, the information that is carried in terms of each of the original four PID atoms (Red, Un1, Un2, and Syn) at one point in time, at the next point in time may be carried as the same atom, or as any of the other atoms. Therefore, there are 4 × 4 = 16 combinations of PID atoms, which correspond to the decomposition established by ΦID. For instance, $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$U{n_1} \to Syn$\end{document}$ denotes the information that is initially carried uniquely by the first source and subsequently becomes carried synergistically. For more details about the interpretation of each of the ΦID atoms, and the generalization to more than two variables, we refer the reader to Mediano et al. (2021).

Taken together, PID and ΦID constitute valuable tools to refine our understanding of information processing in dynamical systems—and, therefore, can be used to refine our theories of any phenomenon that depends on such information processing, like consciousness. In the same way as PID allows us to refine our understanding of mutual information, we will see that ΦID allows us to refine our understanding of ΦWMS.


Refining Φ through ΦID

ΦID makes it possible to decompose the information flow between the past and future states of each part of a system. Thus, a key feature of ΦID for our purposes is that it makes PID applicable to dynamical processes—including neural dynamics. A growing body of recent work has demonstrated that considering dynamical aspects of the brain can shed critical light on various aspects of consciousness (Northoff et al. 2020). For example, it has been shown that brain dynamics are significantly altered when consciousness is suppressed by anaesthesia or severe brain injury (Luppi et al. 2019; Luppi et al. 2021a; Huang et al. 2020; Demertzi et al. 2019; Barttfeld et al. 2015), or altered by psychedelics (Atasoy et al. 2017; Lord et al. 2019; Luppi et al. 2020c, 2021b). These results highlight the key role of neural dynamics for consciousness, vindicating the approach adopted by Tononi et al. (1998).

Specifically, ΦID allows us to decompose the total information flow from the past to the future [TDMI, introduced above as $\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} }{}$I\left({{X_t}; {X_{t + 1}}} \right)$\end{document}$] into a range of modes of information dynamics, which can be used to deepen our understanding of various dynamical phenomena observed in the brain. A deeper understanding of ΦWMS and its drawbacks, such as the reasons why it can adopt negative values, can be gained by decomposing it into its constituent information atoms.

Let us recall that ΦID decomposes the TDMI of a dynamical system with two parts into 16 disjoint atoms [illustrated in]. Of those 16 atoms, it can be shown mathematically (Mediano et al. 2021) that 10 are represented in ΦWMS: seven correspond to all the synergistic information in the system, two correspond to the information transferred from one part to the other, and, importantly, one redundancy atom with a negative sign. Through this decomposition of ΦWMS one can understand why ΦWMS can sometimes take negative values: the subtraction of the redundancy atoms implies that ΦWMS will be negative in redundancy-dominated systems, whenever redundancy is greater than the sum of synergy and information transfer. Note that transfer and synergy are rather different phenomena: while transfer refers to information that ‘moves’ from one variable to another, synergy corresponds to phenomena that involve both variables, but cannot be seen in any of them when they are examined separately (Mediano et al. 2021).

Leveraging ΦID, a revised measure of integrated information, termed ‘ΦR’, can then be formulated by focusing on the synergy and transfer components and dropping the negative redundancy atom from the definition of integrated information (Mediano et al. 2021). Specifically, ΦR is the sum of synergistic and transfer atoms, and it is thereby guaranteed to be non-negative. Thus, the information decomposition of ΦWMS provided by ΦID can successfully identify the source of Φ’s theoretical difficulties and provide a straightforward solution. In addition to the theoretical improvement (which will be further discussed in Section ‘A tale of ice and ΦR: From neural dynamics to the ΦR-ing ratio’), there is also recent evidence that ΦR also provides empirical advantages over the original formulation: unlike ΦWMS, ΦR is reduced between the same sets of brain regions both in patients with chronic disorders of consciousness and during loss of consciousness induced by the intravenous anaesthetic, propofol (Luppi et al. 2020b). Importantly, reductions in ΦR were reversed when participants recovered consciousness after anaesthesia, demonstrating the relevance of ΦR for supporting human consciousness. Thus, given the theoretical advantages of ΦR over Φ outlined here, as well as these recently demonstrated empirical benefits (Luppi et al. 2020b), we will consider ΦR as our primary metric of integrated information and conscious level throughout the rest of this work.


A deepness in the Φ: quantifying causal emergence
